Please take the time to read our formal copyright statement below. Before you do, we would like to explain that this publication is for your own personal use only. Any copying of this publication or sharing of all or part of this publication with any third party is in breach of (a) our intellectual property rights (b) the contractual terms you accept when you register with us (c) our Academic Policy.

This includes:

- Making this publication available to other people by posting it on any third party platform, repository or social media site
- Unintentional sharing of this publication because you have not taken enough care to protect it
- Using all or part of this publication for any purpose other than your own personal training including to provide or inform the content of any other training course or for any other commercial purpose.

Our Academic Policy can be found at https://www.offensive-security.com/legal-docs/

In our discretion, if we find you in breach:

- We will revoke all existing Offensive Security certification(s) you have obtained
- We will disqualify you for life from any Offensive Security courses and exams
- We will disqualify you for life from making future Offensive Security purchases

Copyright © 2023 Offsec Services Ltd. All rights reserved — no part of this publication/video may be copied, published, shared, redistributed, sub-licensed, transmitted, changed, used to create derivative works or in any other way exploited without the prior written permission of Offensive Security.

The following pages contains the lab exercises for the course and should be attempted only inside the Offensive Security hosted lab environment. Please note that most of the attacks described in the lab guide would be illegal if attempted on machines that you do not have explicit permission to test and attack. Since the Offensive Security lab environment is segregated from the Internet, it is safe to perform the attacks inside the lab. Offensive Security does not authorize you to perform these attacks outside its own hosted lab environment and disclaims all liability or responsibility for any such actions