
Modern web applications present an attack surface that has unquestionably continued to grow in importance over the last decade. With the security improvements in network edge devices and the reduction of successful attacks against them, web applications, along with social engineering, arguably represent the most viable way of breaching the network security perimeter.

The desire to provide end-users with an ever-increasingly rich web experience has resulted in the birth of various technologies and development frameworks that are often layered on top of each other. Although these designs achieve their functional goals, they also introduce complexities into web applications that can lead to vulnerabilities with high impact.

In this course, we will focus on the exploitation of chained web application vulnerabilities of various classes, which lead to a compromise of the underlying host operating system. As a part of the exploit development process, we will also dig deep into the methodologies and techniques used to analyze the target web applications. This will give us a complete understanding of the underlying flaws that we are going to exploit.

Ultimately, the goal of this course is to expose you to a general and repeatable approach to web application vulnerability discovery and exploitation, while continuing to strengthen the foundational knowledge that is necessary when faced with modern-day web applications.

## 1.1. About the AWAE Course

This course is designed to develop, or expand, your exploitation skills in web application penetration testing and exploitation research. This is not an entry level course - it is expected that you are familiar with basic web technologies and scripting languages. We will dive into, read, understand, and write code in several languages, including but not limited to JavaScript, PHP, Java, and C#.

Web services have become more resilient and harder to exploit. In order to penetrate today’s modern networks, a new approach is required to gain that initial critical foothold into a network. Penetration testers must be fluent in the art of exploitation when using web based attacks. This intensive hands-on course will take your skills beyond run-of-the-mill SQL injection and file inclusion attacks and introduce you into a world of multi-step, non-trivial web attacks.

This web application security training will broaden your knowledge of web service architecture in order to help you identify and exploit a variety of vulnerability classes that can be found on the web today.

The WEB-300 course is made up of multiple parts. A brief overview of what you should now have access to is below:

- The WEB-300 course materials
- Access to the WEB-300 VPN lab network
- Student forum credentials
- Live support
- OSWE exam attempt/s

**WEB-300 course materials**: comprised of various book modules and the accompanying course videos. The information covered in both the book modules and videos overlaps, which allows you to watch what is being presented in the videos in a quick and efficient manner, and then reference the book modules to fill in the gaps at a later time.

In some modules, the book modules will go into more depth than the videos but the videos are also able to convey some information better than text, so it is important that you pay close attention to both. The book modules also contains exercises for each chapter, as well as extra miles for those students who would like to go above and beyond what is required in order to get the most out of the course.

The WEB-300 lab network includes a _Wiki VM_ that contains supporting material, such as application source code and starter scripts for some exercises. Some modules include exercises that must be completed to continue following along with the module's content. The Wiki VM includes solutions for these exercises, but we encourage you to attempt the exercises on your own and only resort to the solutions when you are stuck. The Wiki VM can be started via the course **Challenge Labs** page in the OffSec Learning Portal.

**Access to the WEB-300 VPN lab network**: Once you have signed up for the course, you will be able to download the VPN pack required to access the lab network via the course lab page in the OffSec Learning Portal. This will enable you to access the WEB-300 VPN lab network, where you will be spending a considerable amount of time. Lab time starts when your course begins, and is in the form of continuous access.

If your lab time expires, or is about to expire, you can purchase a lab extension at any time. To purchase additional lab time, use the "Extend" link available at top right corner of the OffSec Learning Poral. If you purchase a lab extension while your lab access is still active, you can continue to use the same VPN connectivity pack. If you purchase a lab extension after your existing lab access has ended, you will need to download a new VPN connectivity pack via the course lab page in the OffSec Learning Portal.

Students who have purchased a subscription will have access to the lab as long as the subscription is active. Your subscription will be automatically renewed, unless cancelled via the billing page.

**The Offensive Security Student Forum**: The [_student forum_](https://forums.offsec.com/) is only accessible to Offensive Security students. Forum access is permanent and does not expire when your lab time ends. You may even continue to interact with your peers long after having passed the OSWE exam.

By using the forum, you are able to freely communicate with your peers to ask questions, share interesting resources, and offer tips and nudges as long as there are no spoilers (due to the fact they may ruin the overall course experience for others). Please be very mindful when using the forums, otherwise the content you post may be moderated. Once you have successfully passed the OSWE exam, you will gain access to the sub-forum for certificate holders.

**Live Support**: [_Discord_](https://discord.gg/offsec), our community chat platform, can be accessed via the Profile drop-down at the upper right hand corner of the OffSec Learning Portal. Live Support will allow you to directly communicate with our Student Mentors and Student Technical Services Teams.

The Technical Services Team is available to assist with technical issues, while the Student Mentors will be able to clarify items in the course material and exercises. We highly encourage conducting independent research and problem-solving as they are essential skills to have as a cybersecurity professional.

Remember that the information provided by the Student Mentors will be based on the amount of detail you are able to provide. The more detail you can give about what you've already tried and the outcomes you've been able to observe, the more they will be able to help you.

## 1.1.1. OSWE Exam Attempt

Included with your initial purchase of the WEB-300 course is an attempt at the _Offensive Security Web Expert_ (OSWE) certification.

To book your OSWE exam, go to your exam scheduling calendar. The calendar can be located in the OffSec Learning Portal under the course **Exam** page. Here you will be able to see your exam expiry date, as well as schedule the exam for your preferred date and time.

Keep in mind that you won't be able to select a start time if the exam labs are full for that time period so we encourage you to schedule your exam as soon as possible.

For additional information, please visit our [_support page_](https://help.offsec.com/hc/en-us).

## 1.2. Our Approach

Students who have taken our introductory PEN-200 course will find this course to be significantly different. The WEB-300 labs are less diverse and contain a few test case scenarios that the course focuses on. Moreover, a set of dedicated virtual machines hosting these scenarios will be available to each WEB-300 student to experiment with the course material. In few occasions, explanations are intentionally vague in order to challenge you and ensure the concept behind the module is clear to you.

How you approach the WEB-300 course is up to you. Due to the uniqueness of each student, it is not practical for us to tell you how you should approach it, but if you don't have a preferred learning style, we suggest you:

1. Read the emails that were sent to you as part of signup process
2. Start each module by reading the book module and getting a general familiarity with it
3. Once you have finished reading the book module, proceed by watching the accompanying video for that module
4. Gain an understanding of what you are required to do and attempt to recreate the exercise in the lab
5. Perform the Extra Mile exercises. These are not covered in the labs and are up to you to complete on your own
6. Document your findings in your preferred documentation environment

You may opt to start with the course videos, and then review the information for that given book module, or vice versa. As you go through the course material, you may need to re-watch or re-read modules a number of times prior to fully understanding what is being taught. Remember, it is a marathon, not a sprint, so take all the time you need.

As part of most course modules, there will be course exercises for you to complete. We recommend that you fully complete them prior to moving on to the next module. These will test your understanding of the material to ensure you are ready to move forward and will help you preparing for the OSWE exam. The extra miles exercises are optional but we encourage students to "play" with them especially if they have the intention of attempting the certification challenge. The time it takes to complete these exercises depends on your background.

Note that IPs and certain code snippets shown in the book module and videos will not match your environment. We strongly recommend you try to recreate all example scenarios from scratch, rather than copying code from the book modules or videos. In all modules we will challenge you to think in different ways, and rise to the challenges presented.

In addition to the course modules, the lab also contains three standalone lab machines running custom web applications. These applications contain multiple vulnerabilities based on the material covered in the course modules. You will need to apply the lessons learned in this course to tackle these additional machines on your own. These standalone lab machines can be started via the course **Challenge Labs** page in the OffSec Learning Portal.

A heavy focus of the course is on whitebox application security research, so that you can create exploits for vulnerabilities in widely deployed appliances and technologies. Eventually, each security professional develops his or her own methodology, usually based on specific technical strengths. The methodologies suggested in this course are only suggestions. We encourage you to develop your own methodology for approaching web application security testing as you progress through the course.

## 1.3. Obtaining Support

WEB-300 is a self-paced online course. It allows you to go at your own desired speed, perform additional research in areas you may be weak at, and so forth. Take advantage of this type of setting to get the most out of the course--there is no greater feeling than figuring something out on your own.

Prior to contacting us for support, we expect that you have not only gone over the course material but also have taken it upon yourself to dig deeper into the subject area by performing additional research. Our [_Help Center_](https://help.offsec.com/hc/en-us) may help answer some of your questions prior to contacting support (the link is accessible outside of the OffSec Learning Portal).

If your questions have not been covered there, we recommend that you check the student forum, which also can be accessed outside of the internal VPN lab network. Ultimately, if you are unable to obtain the assistance you need, you can get in touch with our student mentors by visiting Live Support or sending an email to [help@offensive-security.com](mailto:help@offensive-security.com).

## 1.4.1. General Information

As noted above, take note that the IP addresses presented in this guide (and the videos) do not necessarily reflect the IP addresses in the OffSec labs. Do not try to copy the examples in the book modules verbatim; you need to adapt the example to your specific lab configuration.

You will find the IP addresses of your assigned lab machines after starting them on the **Challenge Labs** page in the OffSec Learning Portal.

## 1.4.2. Lab Restrictions

The following restrictions are strictly enforced in the internal VPN lab network. If you violate any of the restrictions below, OffSec reserves the right to disable your lab access.

1. Do not ARP spoof or conduct any other type of poisoning or man-in-the-middle attacks against the network
2. Do not intentionally disrupt other students who are working in the labs. This includes but is not limited to:
    - Shutting down machines
    - Kicking users off machines
    - Blocking a specific IP or range
    - Hacking into other students' lab clients or Kali machines

## 1.4.3. Forewarning and Lab Behavior

The internal VPN lab network _is a hostile environment_ and no sensitive information should be stored on your Kali Linux virtual machine that you use to connect to the labs. You can help protect yourself by stopping services when they are not being used and by making sure any default passwords have been changed on your Kali Linux system.

## 1.4.4. Control Panel

Once logged into the OffSec Learning Portal, you can access the WEB-300 [_Challenge Labs_](https://portal.offsec.com/courses/web-300-687/labs) page. This page enables you to revert lab machines in the event they become unresponsive, and so on.

Each student is provided with 24 reverts every 24 hours, enabling them to return a particular lab machine to its pristine state. This counter is reset every day at 00:00 GMT +0. Should you require additional reverts, you can contact a student mentor via email ([help@offensive-security.com](mailto:help@offensive-security.com)) or via [_Discord_](https://discord.gg/offsec).

The minimum amount of time between lab machine reverts is 5 minutes.

## 1.5. Reporting

Students opting for the OSWE certification must submit an exam report clearly demonstrating how they successfully achieved the certification exam objectives. This final report must be sent back to our Certification Board in PDF format no more than 24 hours after the completion of the certification exam. Please note that reporting of the course exercises is mandatory for those students planning to claim CPE credits prior to having successfully passed the OSWE certification exam.

If you were to ask 10 different pentesters how to write a good report, you would likely get 12 different answers. In other words, everybody has an opinion and they are all correct in their own minds. As many people in this industry have demonstrated, there are good ways to write a report and there are some really bad ways to do it.

## 1.6. Backups

There are two types of people: those who regularly back up their documentation, and those who wish they did. Backups are often thought of as insurance - you never know when you're going to need it until you do. As a general rule, we recommend that you backup your documentation regularly as it's a good practice to do so. Please keep your backups in a safe place, as you certainly don't want them to end up in a public git repo, or the cloud for obvious reasons!

Documentation should not be the only thing you back up. Make sure you back up important files on your Kali VM, take appropriate snapshots if needed, and so on.

## 1.7. About the OSWE Exam

The OSWE certification exam simulates a live network in a private lab, which contains a small number of vulnerable systems. The environment is completely dedicated to you for the duration of the exam, and you will have 47 hours and 45 minutes to complete it.

To ensure the integrity of our certifications, the exam will be remotely proctored. You are required to be present 15 minutes before your exam start time to perform identity verification and other pre-exam tasks. In order to do so, click on the **Exam** tab in the OffSec Learning Library, which is situated at the top right of your screen. During these pre-exam verification steps, you will be provided with a VPN connectivity pack.

Once the exam has ended, you will have an additional 24 hours to put together your exam report and document your findings. You will be evaluated on quality and accuracy of the exam report, so please include as much detail as possible and make sure your findings are all reproducible.

Once your exam files have been accepted, your exam will be graded and you will receive your results in ten business days. If you achieve a passing score, we will ask you to confirm your physical address so we can mail your certificate. If you have not achieved a passing score, we will notify you, and you may purchase a certification retake using the appropriate links.

We highly recommend that you carefully schedule your exam for a two day window when you can ensure no outside distractions or commitments. Also, please note that exam availability is handled on a first come, first served basis, so it is best to schedule your exam as far in advance as possible to ensure your preferred date is available.

For additional information regarding the exam, we encourage you to take some time to go over the [_OSWE exam guide_](https://help.offsec.com/hc/en-us/articles/360046869951-WEB-300-Advanced-Web-Attacks-and-Exploitation-OSWE-Exam-Guide).

## 1.8. Wrapping Up

In this module, we discussed important information needed to make the most of the WEB-300 course and lab.

We wish you the best of luck on your WEB-300 journey and hope you enjoy the new challenges you will face.