The need to secure web applications will continue to grow as long as innovation is a driving factor for businesses. As we rely more heavily on web applications for personal and commercial needs, the attack surface also continues to grow. In this course, we've abused these expanding attack surfaces to discover vulnerabilities in web applications. We leveraged these vulnerabilities to chain exploits resulting in the compromise of the underlying servers.

In some instances, we used an application's source code to identify vulnerabilities that automated scanners might miss. When the source code was unavailable, we applied our knowledge of web service architectures and programming languages to discover effective and disastrous exploits. Along the way, we gained a deeper understanding of how web applications work.

## 13.1. The Journey So Far

Throughout the course we explored several ways to bypass authentication in web applications, including session riding via cross-site scripting, type juggling, blind SQL injection, and weak random number generation. We gained remote code execution through insecure file uploads, code injection, deserialization, and server-side template injection. We chained these exploits together to go from unauthenticated users to remote shells on the underlying servers.

We encourage you to continue researching web application exploits and how they can change depending on an application's technology stack. A given vulnerability type, such as XML external entity injection, can have vastly different ramifications depending on the underlying application's programming language or framework.

## 13.2. Exercises and Extra Miles

Each module of the course contains exercises designed to test your comprehension of the material. You will also find "Extra Miles" that require additional effort beyond the normal exercises. While optional, we encourage all students to attempt the "Extra Miles" to get the most out of the course.

## 13.3. The Road Goes Ever On

Once you've completed the course modules, there are additional challenge lab machines available for you to analyze and exploit: _Answers_, _Chat_, _DocEdit_, _Erka_, and _Sqeakr_. These machines run custom web applications, each of which contain several exploits based on the topics covered in this course. For this reason, we recommend you first complete the exercises and extra miles in the course modules before attempting these machines. These machines can be started from the course's _Challenge Labs_ page.

We have pre-configured the Answers application to enable remote debugging and provided the relevant source code on a _debugger_ virtual machine. A small web application is running on this machine as well, accessible on localhost:80. This application simulates remote user actions on the lab machine on-demand for any exploit that requires client-side exploitation.

The Chat, Erka, Gallery, and DocEdit machines include a _debug_ VM and a _victim_ VM. You will have full access to the _debug_ VM, which includes source code and preconfigured debugging. Use these VMs to analyze the applications, discover vulnerabilities, and craft your exploits. However, you must exploit the _victim_ VMs to obtain the _local.txt_ and _proof.txt_ flags. Additional information, credentials, and objectives are available once you start each of these machines.

Choosing how to approach these machines is up to you. While you may be able to find some vulnerabilities through a black box test, a white box approach could be more comprehensive.

The final machine, Sqeakr, is a black box test without any credentials or application source code provided. Of course, if you are able to get a shell on this machine, you can reverse engineer the application to look for other vulnerabilities.

## 13.4. Wrapping Up

The methodologies suggested in this course are only suggestions. We encourage you to take what works for you and continue developing your own methodology for web application security testing as you progress through the extra miles, lab machines, and onward to whatever security assessments await.

It is easy to fixate on one potential vulnerability or go down rabbit holes of endless details when assessing web applications. If you get stuck, take a step back, challenge your assumptions, and change your perspective. Remember to look at all the pieces of information available to you and see how you can fit things together to reach your goal. Do not give up, and always remember to Try Harder.